THE GOLDEN BIRD

A certain king had a beautiful garden, and in the garden stood a tree
which bore golden apples. These apples were always counted, and about
the time when they began to grow ripe it was found that every night one
of them was gone. The king became very angry at this, and ordered the
gardener to keep watch all night under the tree. The gardener set his
eldest son to watch; but about twelve o’clock he fell asleep, and in
the morning another of the apples was missing. Then the second son was
ordered to watch; and at midnight he too fell asleep, and in the morning
another apple was gone. Then the third son offered to keep watch; but
the gardener at first would not let him, for fear some harm should come
to him: however, at last he consented, and the young man laid himself
under the tree to watch. As the clock struck twelve he heard a rustling
noise in the air, and a bird came flying that was of pure gold; and as
it was snapping at one of the apples with its beak, the gardener’s son
jumped up and shot an arrow at it. But the arrow did the bird no harm;
only it dropped a golden feather from its tail, and then flew away.
The golden feather was brought to the king in the morning, and all the
council was called together. Everyone agreed that it was worth more than
all the wealth of the kingdom: but the king said, ‘One feather is of no
use to me, I must have the whole bird.’

Then the gardener’s eldest son set out and thought to find the golden
bird very easily; and when he had gone but a little way, he came to a
wood, and by the side of the wood he saw a fox sitting; so he took his
bow and made ready to shoot at it. Then the fox said, ‘Do not shoot me,
for I will give you good counsel; I know what your business is, and
that you want to find the golden bird. You will reach a village in the
evening; and when you get there, you will see two inns opposite to each
other, one of which is very pleasant and beautiful to look at: go not in
there, but rest for the night in the other, though it may appear to you
to be very poor and mean.’ But the son thought to himself, ‘What can
such a beast as this know about the matter?’ So he shot his arrow at
the fox; but he missed it, and it set up its tail above its back and
ran into the wood. Then he went his way, and in the evening came to
the village where the two inns were; and in one of these were people
singing, and dancing, and feasting; but the other looked very dirty,
and poor. ‘I should be very silly,’ said he, ‘if I went to that shabby
house, and left this charming place’; so he went into the smart house,
and ate and drank at his ease, and forgot the bird, and his country too.

Time passed on; and as the eldest son did not come back, and no tidings
were heard of him, the second son set out, and the same thing happened
to him. He met the fox, who gave him the good advice: but when he came
to the two inns, his eldest brother was standing at the window where
the merrymaking was, and called to him to come in; and he could not
withstand the temptation, but went in, and forgot the golden bird and
his country in the same manner.

Time passed on again, and the youngest son too wished to set out into
the wide world to seek for the golden bird; but his father would not
listen to it for a long while, for he was very fond of his son, and
was afraid that some ill luck might happen to him also, and prevent his
coming back. However, at last it was agreed he should go, for he would
not rest at home; and as he came to the wood, he met the fox, and heard
the same good counsel. But he was thankful to the fox, and did not
attempt his life as his brothers had done; so the fox said, ‘Sit upon my
tail, and you will travel faster.’ So he sat down, and the fox began to
run, and away they went over stock and stone so quick that their hair
whistled in the wind.

When they came to the village, the son followed the fox’s counsel, and
without looking about him went to the shabby inn and rested there all
night at his ease. In the morning came the fox again and met him as he
was beginning his journey, and said, ‘Go straight forward, till you come
to a castle, before which lie a whole troop of soldiers fast asleep and
snoring: take no notice of them, but go into the castle and pass on and
on till you come to a room, where the golden bird sits in a wooden cage;
close by it stands a beautiful golden cage; but do not try to take the
bird out of the shabby cage and put it into the handsome one, otherwise
you will repent it.’ Then the fox stretched out his tail again, and the
young man sat himself down, and away they went over stock and stone till
their hair whistled in the wind.

Before the castle gate all was as the fox had said: so the son went in
and found the chamber where the golden bird hung in a wooden cage, and
below stood the golden cage, and the three golden apples that had been
lost were lying close by it. Then thought he to himself, ‘It will be a
very droll thing to bring away such a fine bird in this shabby cage’; so
he opened the door and took hold of it and put it into the golden cage.
But the bird set up such a loud scream that all the soldiers awoke, and
they took him prisoner and carried him before the king. The next morning
the court sat to judge him; and when all was heard, it sentenced him to
die, unless he should bring the king the golden horse which could run as
swiftly as the wind; and if he did this, he was to have the golden bird
given him for his own.

So he set out once more on his journey, sighing, and in great despair,
when on a sudden his friend the fox met him, and said, ‘You see now
what has happened on account of your not listening to my counsel. I will
still, however, tell you how to find the golden horse, if you will do as
I bid you. You must go straight on till you come to the castle where the
horse stands in his stall: by his side will lie the groom fast asleep
and snoring: take away the horse quietly, but be sure to put the old
leathern saddle upon him, and not the golden one that is close by it.’
Then the son sat down on the fox’s tail, and away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled in the wind.

All went right, and the groom lay snoring with his hand upon the golden
saddle. But when the son looked at the horse, he thought it a great pity
to put the leathern saddle upon it. ‘I will give him the good one,’
said he; ‘I am sure he deserves it.’ As he took up the golden saddle the
groom awoke and cried out so loud, that all the guards ran in and took
him prisoner, and in the morning he was again brought before the court
to be judged, and was sentenced to die. But it was agreed, that, if he
could bring thither the beautiful princess, he should live, and have the
bird and the horse given him for his own.

Then he went his way very sorrowful; but the old fox came and said, ‘Why
did not you listen to me? If you had, you would have carried away
both the bird and the horse; yet will I once more give you counsel. Go
straight on, and in the evening you will arrive at a castle. At twelve
o’clock at night the princess goes to the bathing-house: go up to her
and give her a kiss, and she will let you lead her away; but take care
you do not suffer her to go and take leave of her father and mother.’
Then the fox stretched out his tail, and so away they went over stock
and stone till their hair whistled again.

As they came to the castle, all was as the fox had said, and at twelve
o’clock the young man met the princess going to the bath and gave her the
kiss, and she agreed to run away with him, but begged with many tears
that he would let her take leave of her father. At first he refused,
but she wept still more and more, and fell at his feet, till at last
he consented; but the moment she came to her father’s house the guards
awoke and he was taken prisoner again.

Then he was brought before the king, and the king said, ‘You shall never
have my daughter unless in eight days you dig away the hill that stops
the view from my window.’ Now this hill was so big that the whole world
could not take it away: and when he had worked for seven days, and had
done very little, the fox came and said. ‘Lie down and go to sleep; I
will work for you.’ And in the morning he awoke and the hill was gone;
so he went merrily to the king, and told him that now that it was
removed he must give him the princess.

Then the king was obliged to keep his word, and away went the young man
and the princess; and the fox came and said to him, ‘We will have all
three, the princess, the horse, and the bird.’ ‘Ah!’ said the young man,
‘that would be a great thing, but how can you contrive it?’

‘If you will only listen,’ said the fox, ‘it can be done. When you come
to the king, and he asks for the beautiful princess, you must say, “Here
she is!” Then he will be very joyful; and you will mount the golden
horse that they are to give you, and put out your hand to take leave of
them; but shake hands with the princess last. Then lift her quickly on
to the horse behind you; clap your spurs to his side, and gallop away as
fast as you can.’

All went right: then the fox said, ‘When you come to the castle where
the bird is, I will stay with the princess at the door, and you will
ride in and speak to the king; and when he sees that it is the right
horse, he will bring out the bird; but you must sit still, and say that
you want to look at it, to see whether it is the true golden bird; and
when you get it into your hand, ride away.’

This, too, happened as the fox said; they carried off the bird, the
princess mounted again, and they rode on to a great wood. Then the fox
came, and said, ‘Pray kill me, and cut off my head and my feet.’ But the
young man refused to do it: so the fox said, ‘I will at any rate give
you good counsel: beware of two things; ransom no one from the gallows,
and sit down by the side of no river.’ Then away he went. ‘Well,’
thought the young man, ‘it is no hard matter to keep that advice.’

He rode on with the princess, till at last he came to the village where
he had left his two brothers. And there he heard a great noise and
uproar; and when he asked what was the matter, the people said, ‘Two men
are going to be hanged.’ As he came nearer, he saw that the two men were
his brothers, who had turned robbers; so he said, ‘Cannot they in any
way be saved?’ But the people said ‘No,’ unless he would bestow all his
money upon the rascals and buy their liberty. Then he did not stay to
think about the matter, but paid what was asked, and his brothers were
given up, and went on with him towards their home.

And as they came to the wood where the fox first met them, it was so
cool and pleasant that the two brothers said, ‘Let us sit down by the
side of the river, and rest a while, to eat and drink.’ So he said,
‘Yes,’ and forgot the fox’s counsel, and sat down on the side of the
river; and while he suspected nothing, they came behind, and threw him
down the bank, and took the princess, the horse, and the bird, and went
home to the king their master, and said. ‘All this have we won by our
labour.’ Then there was great rejoicing made; but the horse would not
eat, the bird would not sing, and the princess wept.

The youngest son fell to the bottom of the river’s bed: luckily it was
nearly dry, but his bones were almost broken, and the bank was so steep
that he could find no way to get out. Then the old fox came once more,
and scolded him for not following his advice; otherwise no evil would
have befallen him: ‘Yet,’ said he, ‘I cannot leave you here, so lay hold
of my tail and hold fast.’ Then he pulled him out of the river, and said
to him, as he got upon the bank, ‘Your brothers have set watch to kill
you, if they find you in the kingdom.’ So he dressed himself as a poor
man, and came secretly to the king’s court, and was scarcely within the
doors when the horse began to eat, and the bird to sing, and the princess
left off weeping. Then he went to the king, and told him all his
brothers’ roguery; and they were seized and punished, and he had the
princess given to him again; and after the king’s death he was heir to
his kingdom.

A long while after, he went to walk one day in the wood, and the old fox
met him, and besought him with tears in his eyes to kill him, and cut
off his head and feet. And at last he did so, and in a moment the
fox was changed into a man, and turned out to be the brother of the
princess, who had been lost a great many many years.




HANS IN LUCK

Some men are born to good luck: all they do or try to do comes
right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are
swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will, they
will always, like poor puss, alight upon their legs, and only move on so
much the faster. The world may very likely not always think of them as
they think of themselves, but what care they for the world? what can it
know about the matter?

One of these lucky beings was neighbour Hans. Seven long years he had
worked hard for his master. At last he said, ‘Master, my time is up; I
must go home and see my poor mother once more: so pray pay me my wages
and let me go.’ And the master said, ‘You have been a faithful and good
servant, Hans, so your pay shall be handsome.’ Then he gave him a lump
of silver as big as his head.

Hans took out his pocket-handkerchief, put the piece of silver into it,
threw it over his shoulder, and jogged off on his road homewards. As he
went lazily on, dragging one foot after another, a man came in sight,
trotting gaily along on a capital horse. ‘Ah!’ said Hans aloud, ‘what a
fine thing it is to ride on horseback! There he sits as easy and happy
as if he was at home, in the chair by his fireside; he trips against no
stones, saves shoe-leather, and gets on he hardly knows how.’ Hans did
not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all, and said, ‘Well,
friend, why do you go on foot then?’ ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘I have this load to
carry: to be sure it is silver, but it is so heavy that I can’t hold up
my head, and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly.’ ‘What do you say
of making an exchange?’ said the horseman. ‘I will give you my horse,
and you shall give me the silver; which will save you a great deal of
trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said Hans: ‘but as you are so kind to me, I must tell you one
thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you.’
However, the horseman got off, took the silver, helped Hans up, gave him
the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other, and said, ‘When
you want to go very fast, smack your lips loudly together, and cry
“Jip!”’

Hans was delighted as he sat on the horse, drew himself up, squared his
elbows, turned out his toes, cracked his whip, and rode merrily off, one
minute whistling a merry tune, and another singing,

 ‘No care and no sorrow,
  A fig for the morrow!
  We’ll laugh and be merry,
  Sing neigh down derry!’

After a time he thought he should like to go a little faster, so he
smacked his lips and cried ‘Jip!’ Away went the horse full gallop; and
before Hans knew what he was about, he was thrown off, and lay on his
back by the road-side. His horse would have ran off, if a shepherd who
was coming by, driving a cow, had not stopped it. Hans soon came to
himself, and got upon his legs again, sadly vexed, and said to the
shepherd, ‘This riding is no joke, when a man has the luck to get upon
a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break
his neck. However, I’m off now once for all: I like your cow now a great
deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick, and has
spoiled my best coat, you see, in this puddle; which, by the by, smells
not very like a nosegay. One can walk along at one’s leisure behind that
cow--keep good company, and have milk, butter, and cheese, every day,
into the bargain. What would I give to have such a prize!’ ‘Well,’ said
the shepherd, ‘if you are so fond of her, I will change my cow for your
horse; I like to do good to my neighbours, even though I lose by it
myself.’ ‘Done!’ said Hans, merrily. ‘What a noble heart that good man
has!’ thought he. Then the shepherd jumped upon the horse, wished Hans
and the cow good morning, and away he rode.

Hans brushed his coat, wiped his face and hands, rested a while, and
then drove off his cow quietly, and thought his bargain a very lucky
one. ‘If I have only a piece of bread (and I certainly shall always be
able to get that), I can, whenever I like, eat my butter and cheese with
it; and when I am thirsty I can milk my cow and drink the milk: and what
can I wish for more?’ When he came to an inn, he halted, ate up all his
bread, and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer. When he had
rested himself he set off again, driving his cow towards his mother’s
village. But the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on, till at
last, as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than
an hour to cross, he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue
clave to the roof of his mouth. ‘I can find a cure for this,’ thought
he; ‘now I will milk my cow and quench my thirst’: so he tied her to the
stump of a tree, and held his leathern cap to milk into; but not a drop
was to be had. Who would have thought that this cow, which was to bring
him milk and butter and cheese, was all that time utterly dry? Hans had
not thought of looking to that.

While he was trying his luck in milking, and managing the matter very
clumsily, the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome; and at
last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down; and there he
lay a long while senseless. Luckily a butcher soon came by, driving a
pig in a wheelbarrow. ‘What is the matter with you, my man?’ said the
butcher, as he helped him up. Hans told him what had happened, how he
was dry, and wanted to milk his cow, but found the cow was dry too. Then
the butcher gave him a flask of ale, saying, ‘There, drink and refresh
yourself; your cow will give you no milk: don’t you see she is an old
beast, good for nothing but the slaughter-house?’ ‘Alas, alas!’ said
Hans, ‘who would have thought it? What a shame to take my horse, and
give me only a dry cow! If I kill her, what will she be good for? I hate
cow-beef; it is not tender enough for me. If it were a pig now--like
that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do
something with it; it would at any rate make sausages.’ ‘Well,’ said
the butcher, ‘I don’t like to say no, when one is asked to do a kind,
neighbourly thing. To please you I will change, and give you my fine fat
pig for the cow.’ ‘Heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial!’
said Hans, as he gave the butcher the cow; and taking the pig off the
wheel-barrow, drove it away, holding it by the string that was tied to
its leg.

So on he jogged, and all seemed now to go right with him: he had met
with some misfortunes, to be sure; but he was now well repaid for all.
How could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at
last got?

The next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose. The
countryman stopped to ask what was o’clock; this led to further chat;
and Hans told him all his luck, how he had so many good bargains, and
how all the world went gay and smiling with him. The countryman then
began to tell his tale, and said he was going to take the goose to a
christening. ‘Feel,’ said he, ‘how heavy it is, and yet it is only eight
weeks old. Whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it,
it has lived so well!’ ‘You’re right,’ said Hans, as he weighed it in
his hand; ‘but if you talk of fat, my pig is no trifle.’ Meantime the
countryman began to look grave, and shook his head. ‘Hark ye!’ said he,
‘my worthy friend, you seem a good sort of fellow, so I can’t help doing
you a kind turn. Your pig may get you into a scrape. In the village I
just came from, the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty. I was
dreadfully afraid when I saw you that you had got the squire’s pig. If
you have, and they catch you, it will be a bad job for you. The least
they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond. Can you swim?’

Poor Hans was sadly frightened. ‘Good man,’ cried he, ‘pray get me out
of this scrape. I know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born;
but he may have been the squire’s for aught I can tell: you know this
country better than I do, take my pig and give me the goose.’ ‘I ought
to have something into the bargain,’ said the countryman; ‘give a fat
goose for a pig, indeed! ‘Tis not everyone would do so much for you as
that. However, I will not be hard upon you, as you are in trouble.’ Then
he took the string in his hand, and drove off the pig by a side path;
while Hans went on the way homewards free from care. ‘After all,’
thought he, ‘that chap is pretty well taken in. I don’t care whose pig
it is, but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me. I
have much the best of the bargain. First there will be a capital roast;
then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months; and then there
are all the beautiful white feathers. I will put them into my pillow,
and then I am sure I shall sleep soundly without rocking. How happy my
mother will be! Talk of a pig, indeed! Give me a fine fat goose.’

As he came to the next village, he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel,
working and singing,

 ‘O’er hill and o’er dale
  So happy I roam,
  Work light and live well,
  All the world is my home;
  Then who so blythe, so merry as I?’

Hans stood looking on for a while, and at last said, ‘You must be well
off, master grinder! you seem so happy at your work.’ ‘Yes,’ said the
other, ‘mine is a golden trade; a good grinder never puts his hand
into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that
beautiful goose?’ ‘I did not buy it, I gave a pig for it.’ ‘And where
did you get the pig?’ ‘I gave a cow for it.’ ‘And the cow?’ ‘I gave a
horse for it.’ ‘And the horse?’ ‘I gave a lump of silver as big as my
head for it.’ ‘And the silver?’ ‘Oh! I worked hard for that seven long
years.’ ‘You have thriven well in the world hitherto,’ said the grinder,
‘now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand
in it, your fortune would be made.’ ‘Very true: but how is that to be
managed?’ ‘How? Why, you must turn grinder like myself,’ said the other;
‘you only want a grindstone; the rest will come of itself. Here is one
that is but little the worse for wear: I would not ask more than the
value of your goose for it--will you buy?’ ‘How can you ask?’ said
Hans; ‘I should be the happiest man in the world, if I could have money
whenever I put my hand in my pocket: what could I want more? there’s
the goose.’ ‘Now,’ said the grinder, as he gave him a common rough stone
that lay by his side, ‘this is a most capital stone; do but work it well
enough, and you can make an old nail cut with it.’

Hans took the stone, and went his way with a light heart: his eyes
sparkled for joy, and he said to himself, ‘Surely I must have been born
in a lucky hour; everything I could want or wish for comes of itself.
People are so kind; they seem really to think I do them a favour in
letting them make me rich, and giving me good bargains.’

Meantime he began to be tired, and hungry too, for he had given away his
last penny in his joy at getting the cow.

At last he could go no farther, for the stone tired him sadly: and he
dragged himself to the side of a river, that he might take a drink of
water, and rest a while. So he laid the stone carefully by his side on
the bank: but, as he stooped down to drink, he forgot it, pushed it a
little, and down it rolled, plump into the stream.

For a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water; then sprang
up and danced for joy, and again fell upon his knees and thanked Heaven,
with tears in his eyes, for its kindness in taking away his only plague,
the ugly heavy stone.

‘How happy am I!’ cried he; ‘nobody was ever so lucky as I.’ Then up he
got with a light heart, free from all his troubles, and walked on till
he reached his mother’s house, and told her how very easy the road to
good luck was.




JORINDA AND JORINDEL

There was once an old castle, that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy
wood, and in the castle lived an old fairy. Now this fairy could take
any shape she pleased. All the day long she flew about in the form of
an owl, or crept about the country like a cat; but at night she always
became an old woman again. When any young man came within a hundred
paces of her castle, he became quite fixed, and could not move a step
till she came and set him free; which she would not do till he had given
her his word never to come there again: but when any pretty maiden came
within that space she was changed into a bird, and the fairy put her
into a cage, and hung her up in a chamber in the castle. There were
seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle, and all with
beautiful birds in them.

Now there was once a maiden whose name was Jorinda. She was prettier
than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before, and a shepherd
lad, whose name was Jorindel, was very fond of her, and they were soon
to be married. One day they went to walk in the wood, that they might be
alone; and Jorindel said, ‘We must take care that we don’t go too near
to the fairy’s castle.’ It was a beautiful evening; the last rays of the
setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon
the green underwood beneath, and the turtle-doves sang from the tall
birches.

Jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun; Jorindel sat by her side; and
both felt sad, they knew not why; but it seemed as if they were to be
parted from one another for ever. They had wandered a long way; and when
they looked to see which way they should go home, they found themselves
at a loss to know what path to take.

The sun was setting fast, and already half of its circle had sunk behind
the hill: Jorindel on a sudden looked behind him, and saw through the
bushes that they had, without knowing it, sat down close under the old
walls of the castle. Then he shrank for fear, turned pale, and trembled.
Jorinda was just singing,

 ‘The ring-dove sang from the willow spray,
  Well-a-day! Well-a-day!
  He mourn’d for the fate of his darling mate,
  Well-a-day!’

when her song stopped suddenly. Jorindel turned to see the reason, and
beheld his Jorinda changed into a nightingale, so that her song ended
with a mournful _jug, jug_. An owl with fiery eyes flew three times
round them, and three times screamed:

 ‘Tu whu! Tu whu! Tu whu!’

Jorindel could not move; he stood fixed as a stone, and could neither
weep, nor speak, nor stir hand or foot. And now the sun went quite down;
the gloomy night came; the owl flew into a bush; and a moment after the
old fairy came forth pale and meagre, with staring eyes, and a nose and
chin that almost met one another.

She mumbled something to herself, seized the nightingale, and went away
with it in her hand. Poor Jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but
what could he do? He could not speak, he could not move from the spot
where he stood. At last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse
voice:

 ‘Till the prisoner is fast,
  And her doom is cast,
  There stay! Oh, stay!
  When the charm is around her,
  And the spell has bound her,
  Hie away! away!’

On a sudden Jorindel found himself free. Then he fell on his knees
before the fairy, and prayed her to give him back his dear Jorinda: but
she laughed at him, and said he should never see her again; then she
went her way.

He prayed, he wept, he sorrowed, but all in vain. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘what
will become of me?’ He could not go back to his own home, so he went to
a strange village, and employed himself in keeping sheep. Many a time
did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go,
but all in vain; he heard or saw nothing of Jorinda.

At last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower,
and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl; and he dreamt that he
plucked the flower, and went with it in his hand into the castle, and
that everything he touched with it was disenchanted, and that there he
found his Jorinda again.

In the morning when he awoke, he began to search over hill and dale for
this pretty flower; and eight long days he sought for it in vain: but
on the ninth day, early in the morning, he found the beautiful purple
flower; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop, as big as a costly
pearl. Then he plucked the flower, and set out and travelled day and
night, till he came again to the castle.

He walked nearer than a hundred paces to it, and yet he did not become
fixed as before, but found that he could go quite close up to the door.
Jorindel was very glad indeed to see this. Then he touched the door with
the flower, and it sprang open; so that he went in through the court,
and listened when he heard so many birds singing. At last he came to the
chamber where the fairy sat, with the seven hundred birds singing in
the seven hundred cages. When she saw Jorindel she was very angry, and
screamed with rage; but she could not come within two yards of him, for
the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard. He looked around at
the birds, but alas! there were many, many nightingales, and how then
should he find out which was his Jorinda? While he was thinking what to
do, he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages, and was making the
best of her way off through the door. He ran or flew after her, touched
the cage with the flower, and Jorinda stood before him, and threw her
arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever, as beautiful as when
they walked together in the wood.

Then he touched all the other birds with the flower, so that they all
took their old forms again; and he took Jorinda home, where they were
married, and lived happily together many years: and so did a good many
other lads, whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy’s
cages by themselves, much longer than they liked.




THE TRAVELLING MUSICIANS

An honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him
a great many years, but was now growing old and every day more and more
unfit for work. His master therefore was tired of keeping him and
began to think of putting an end to him; but the ass, who saw that some
mischief was in the wind, took himself slyly off, and began his journey
towards the great city, ‘For there,’ thought he, ‘I may turn musician.’

After he had travelled a little way, he spied a dog lying by the
roadside and panting as if he were tired. ‘What makes you pant so, my
friend?’ said the ass. ‘Alas!’ said the dog, ‘my master was going to
knock me on the head, because I am old and weak, and can no longer make
myself useful to him in hunting; so I ran away; but what can I do to
earn my livelihood?’ ‘Hark ye!’ said the ass, ‘I am going to the great
city to turn musician: suppose you go with me, and try what you can
do in the same way?’ The dog said he was willing, and they jogged on
together.

They had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the
road and making a most rueful face. ‘Pray, my good lady,’ said the ass,
‘what’s the matter with you? You look quite out of spirits!’ ‘Ah, me!’
said the cat, ‘how can one be in good spirits when one’s life is in
danger? Because I am beginning to grow old, and had rather lie at my
ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice, my mistress
laid hold of me, and was going to drown me; and though I have been lucky
enough to get away from her, I do not know what I am to live upon.’
‘Oh,’ said the ass, ‘by all means go with us to the great city; you are
a good night singer, and may make your fortune as a musician.’ The cat
was pleased with the thought, and joined the party.

Soon afterwards, as they were passing by a farmyard, they saw a cock
perched upon a gate, and screaming out with all his might and main.
‘Bravo!’ said the ass; ‘upon my word, you make a famous noise; pray what
is all this about?’ ‘Why,’ said the cock, ‘I was just now saying that
we should have fine weather for our washing-day, and yet my mistress and
the cook don’t thank me for my pains, but threaten to cut off my
head tomorrow, and make broth of me for the guests that are coming
on Sunday!’ ‘Heaven forbid!’ said the ass, ‘come with us Master
Chanticleer; it will be better, at any rate, than staying here to have
your head cut off! Besides, who knows? If we care to sing in tune, we
may get up some kind of a concert; so come along with us.’ ‘With all my
heart,’ said the cock: so they all four went on jollily together.

They could not, however, reach the great city the first day; so when
night came on, they went into a wood to sleep. The ass and the dog laid
themselves down under a great tree, and the cat climbed up into the
branches; while the cock, thinking that the higher he sat the safer he
should be, flew up to the very top of the tree, and then, according to
his custom, before he went to sleep, looked out on all sides of him to
see that everything was well. In doing this, he saw afar off something
bright and shining and calling to his companions said, ‘There must be a
house no great way off, for I see a light.’ ‘If that be the case,’ said
the ass, ‘we had better change our quarters, for our lodging is not the
best in the world!’ ‘Besides,’ added the dog, ‘I should not be the
worse for a bone or two, or a bit of meat.’ So they walked off together
towards the spot where Chanticleer had seen the light, and as they drew
near it became larger and brighter, till they at last came close to a
house in which a gang of robbers lived.

The ass, being the tallest of the company, marched up to the window and
peeped in. ‘Well, Donkey,’ said Chanticleer, ‘what do you see?’ ‘What
do I see?’ replied the ass. ‘Why, I see a table spread with all kinds of
good things, and robbers sitting round it making merry.’ ‘That would
be a noble lodging for us,’ said the cock. ‘Yes,’ said the ass, ‘if we
could only get in’; so they consulted together how they should contrive
to get the robbers out; and at last they hit upon a plan. The ass placed
himself upright on his hind legs, with his forefeet resting against the
window; the dog got upon his back; the cat scrambled up to the dog’s
shoulders, and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat’s head. When
all was ready a signal was given, and they began their music. The ass
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock screamed; and then
they all broke through the window at once, and came tumbling into
the room, amongst the broken glass, with a most hideous clatter! The
robbers, who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert,
had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them,
and scampered away as fast as they could.

The coast once clear, our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what
the robbers had left, with as much eagerness as if they had not expected
to eat again for a month. As soon as they had satisfied themselves, they
put out the lights, and each once more sought out a resting-place to
his own liking. The donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in
the yard, the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door, the
cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes, and the
cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house; and, as they were all
rather tired with their journey, they soon fell asleep.

But about midnight, when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were
out and that all seemed quiet, they began to think that they had been in
too great a hurry to run away; and one of them, who was bolder than
the rest, went to see what was going on. Finding everything still, he
marched into the kitchen, and groped about till he found a match in
order to light a candle; and then, espying the glittering fiery eyes of
the cat, he mistook them for live coals, and held the match to them to
light it. But the cat, not understanding this joke, sprang at his face,
and spat, and scratched at him. This frightened him dreadfully, and away
he ran to the back door; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the
leg; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him; and the
cock, who had been awakened by the noise, crowed with all his might. At
this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades, and told
the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house, and had spat at
him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers; how a man with a
knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door, and stabbed him
in the leg; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a
club, and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out,
‘Throw the rascal up here!’ After this the robbers never dared to go
back to the house; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters
that they took up their abode there; and there they are, I dare say, at
this very day.




OLD SULTAN

A shepherd had a faithful dog, called Sultan, who was grown very old,
and had lost all his teeth. And one day when the shepherd and his wife
were standing together before the house the shepherd said, ‘I will shoot
old Sultan tomorrow morning, for he is of no use now.’ But his wife
said, ‘Pray let the poor faithful creature live; he has served us well a
great many years, and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of
his days.’ ‘But what can we do with him?’ said the shepherd, ‘he has not
a tooth in his head, and the thieves don’t care for him at all; to
be sure he has served us, but then he did it to earn his livelihood;
tomorrow shall be his last day, depend upon it.’

Poor Sultan, who was lying close by them, heard all that the shepherd
and his wife said to one another, and was very much frightened to think
tomorrow would be his last day; so in the evening he went to his good
friend the wolf, who lived in the wood, and told him all his sorrows,
and how his master meant to kill him in the morning. ‘Make yourself
easy,’ said the wolf, ‘I will give you some good advice. Your master,
you know, goes out every morning very early with his wife into the
field; and they take their little child with them, and lay it down
behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work. Now do you lie
down close by the child, and pretend to be watching it, and I will come
out of the wood and run away with it; you must run after me as fast as
you can, and I will let it drop; then you may carry it back, and they
will think you have saved their child, and will be so thankful to you
that they will take care of you as long as you live.’ The dog liked this
plan very well; and accordingly so it was managed. The wolf ran with the
child a little way; the shepherd and his wife screamed out; but Sultan
soon overtook him, and carried the poor little thing back to his master
and mistress. Then the shepherd patted him on the head, and said, ‘Old
Sultan has saved our child from the wolf, and therefore he shall live
and be well taken care of, and have plenty to eat. Wife, go home, and
give him a good dinner, and let him have my old cushion to sleep on
as long as he lives.’ So from this time forward Sultan had all that he
could wish for.

Soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy, and said, ‘Now, my
good fellow, you must tell no tales, but turn your head the other way
when I want to taste one of the old shepherd’s fine fat sheep.’ ‘No,’
said the Sultan; ‘I will be true to my master.’ However, the wolf
thought he was in joke, and came one night to get a dainty morsel. But
Sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do; so he laid wait
for him behind the barn door, and when the wolf was busy looking out for
a good fat sheep, he had a stout cudgel laid about his back, that combed
his locks for him finely.

Then the wolf was very angry, and called Sultan ‘an old rogue,’ and
swore he would have his revenge. So the next morning the wolf sent the
boar to challenge Sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter. Now
Sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd’s old
three-legged cat; so he took her with him, and as the poor thing limped
along with some trouble, she stuck up her tail straight in the air.

The wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground; and when they
espied their enemies coming, and saw the cat’s long tail standing
straight in the air, they thought she was carrying a sword for Sultan to
fight with; and every time she limped, they thought she was picking up
a stone to throw at them; so they said they should not like this way of
fighting, and the boar lay down behind a bush, and the wolf jumped
up into a tree. Sultan and the cat soon came up, and looked about and
wondered that no one was there. The boar, however, had not quite hidden
himself, for his ears stuck out of the bush; and when he shook one of
them a little, the cat, seeing something move, and thinking it was a
mouse, sprang upon it, and bit and scratched it, so that the boar jumped
up and grunted, and ran away, roaring out, ‘Look up in the tree, there
sits the one who is to blame.’ So they looked up, and espied the wolf
sitting amongst the branches; and they called him a cowardly rascal,
and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of
himself, and had promised to be good friends again with old Sultan.




THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN

In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together a dish
of beans and wanted to cook them. So she made a fire on her hearth, and
that it might burn the quicker, she lighted it with a handful of straw.
When she was emptying the beans into the pan, one dropped without her
observing it, and lay on the ground beside a straw, and soon afterwards
a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two. Then the straw
began and said: ‘Dear friends, from whence do you come here?’ The coal
replied: ‘I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escaped
by sheer force, my death would have been certain,--I should have been
burnt to ashes.’ The bean said: ‘I too have escaped with a whole skin,
but if the old woman had got me into the pan, I should have been made
into broth without any mercy, like my comrades.’ ‘And would a better
fate have fallen to my lot?’ said the straw. ‘The old woman has
destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke; she seized sixty of them at
once, and took their lives. I luckily slipped through her fingers.’

‘But what are we to do now?’ said the coal.

‘I think,’ answered the bean, ‘that as we have so fortunately escaped
death, we should keep together like good companions, and lest a new
mischance should overtake us here, we should go away together, and
repair to a foreign country.’

The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on their way
together. Soon, however, they came to a little brook, and as there was
no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how they were to get over
it. The straw hit on a good idea, and said: ‘I will lay myself straight
across, and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge.’ The straw
therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other, and the coal,
who was of an impetuous disposition, tripped quite boldly on to the
newly-built bridge. But when she had reached the middle, and heard the
water rushing beneath her, she was after all, afraid, and stood still,
and ventured no farther. The straw, however, began to burn, broke in
two pieces, and fell into the stream. The coal slipped after her, hissed
when she got into the water, and breathed her last. The bean, who had
prudently stayed behind on the shore, could not but laugh at the event,
was unable to stop, and laughed so heartily that she burst. It would
have been all over with her, likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who
was travelling in search of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.
As he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread,
and sewed her together. The bean thanked him most prettily, but as the
tailor used black thread, all beans since then have a black seam.




BRIAR ROSE

A king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off,
where there were in those days fairies. Now this king and queen had
plenty of money, and plenty of fine clothes to wear, and plenty of
good things to eat and drink, and a coach to ride out in every day: but
though they had been married many years they had no children, and this
grieved them very much indeed. But one day as the queen was walking
by the side of the river, at the bottom of the garden, she saw a poor
little fish, that had thrown itself out of the water, and lay gasping
and nearly dead on the bank. Then the queen took pity on the little
fish, and threw it back again into the river; and before it swam away
it lifted its head out of the water and said, ‘I know what your wish is,
and it shall be fulfilled, in return for your kindness to me--you will
soon have a daughter.’ What the little fish had foretold soon came to
pass; and the queen had a little girl, so very beautiful that the king
could not cease looking on it for joy, and said he would hold a great
feast and make merry, and show the child to all the land. So he asked
his kinsmen, and nobles, and friends, and neighbours. But the queen
said, ‘I will have the fairies also, that they might be kind and good
to our little daughter.’ Now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom;
but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat
out of, they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her.
So twelve fairies came, each with a high red cap on her head, and red
shoes with high heels on her feet, and a long white wand in her hand:
and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all
their best gifts to the little princess. One gave her goodness, another
beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all that was good in the
world.

Just as eleven of them had done blessing her, a great noise was heard in
the courtyard, and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was
come, with a black cap on her head, and black shoes on her feet, and a
broomstick in her hand: and presently up she came into the dining-hall.
Now, as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry, and
scolded the king and queen very much, and set to work to take her
revenge. So she cried out, ‘The king’s daughter shall, in her fifteenth
year, be wounded by a spindle, and fall down dead.’ Then the twelfth of
the friendly fairies, who had not yet given her gift, came forward, and
said that the evil wish must be fulfilled, but that she could soften its
mischief; so her gift was, that the king’s daughter, when the spindle
wounded her, should not really die, but should only fall asleep for a
hundred years.

However, the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from
the threatened evil; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom
should be bought up and burnt. But all the gifts of the first eleven
fairies were in the meantime fulfilled; for the princess was so
beautiful, and well behaved, and good, and wise, that everyone who knew
her loved her.

It happened that, on the very day she was fifteen years old, the king
and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she
roved about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till
at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase
ending with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when
she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily. ‘Why, how now, good mother,’ said the princess; ‘what
are you doing there?’ ‘Spinning,’ said the old lady, and nodded her
head, humming a tune, while buzz! went the wheel. ‘How prettily that
little thing turns round!’ said the princess, and took the spindle
and began to try and spin. But scarcely had she touched it, before the
fairy’s prophecy was fulfilled; the spindle wounded her, and she fell
down lifeless on the ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who had just come home, and all their court,
fell asleep too; and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the court, the pigeons on the house-top, and the very flies slept upon
the walls. Even the fire on the hearth left off blazing, and went to
sleep; the jack stopped, and the spit that was turning about with a
goose upon it for the king’s dinner stood still; and the cook, who was
at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box
on the ear for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell
asleep; the butler, who was slyly tasting the ale, fell asleep with the
jug at his lips: and thus everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker; till at last the old palace was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen. But
there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping Briar
Rose (for so the king’s daughter was called): so that, from time to
time, several kings’ sons came, and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace. This, however, none of them could ever do; for the
thorns and bushes laid hold of them, as it were with hands; and there
they stuck fast, and died wretchedly.

After many, many years there came a king’s son into that land: and an
old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns; and how a beautiful
palace stood behind it, and how a wonderful princess, called Briar Rose,
lay in it asleep, with all her court. He told, too, how he had heard
from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had tried to
break through the thicket, but that they had all stuck fast in it, and
died. Then the young prince said, ‘All this shall not frighten me; I
will go and see this Briar Rose.’ The old man tried to hinder him, but
he was bent upon going.

Now that very day the hundred years were ended; and as the prince came
to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs, through
which he went with ease, and they shut in after him as thick as ever.
Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the dogs
asleep; and the horses were standing in the stables; and on the roof sat
the pigeons fast asleep, with their heads under their wings. And when he
came into the palace, the flies were sleeping on the walls; the spit
was standing still; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips, going
to drink a draught; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be
plucked; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand, as
if she was going to beat the boy.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower, and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was; and there she lay,
fast asleep on a couch by the window. She looked so beautiful that he
could not take his eyes off her, so he stooped down and gave her a kiss.
But the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled
upon him; and they went out together; and soon the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and gazed on each other with great wonder.
And the horses shook themselves, and the dogs jumped up and barked; the
pigeons took their heads from under their wings, and looked about and
flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed again; the fire in
the kitchen blazed up; round went the jack, and round went the spit,
with the goose for the king’s dinner upon it; the butler finished his
draught of ale; the maid went on plucking the fowl; and the cook gave
the boy the box on his ear.

And then the prince and Briar Rose were married, and the wedding feast
was given; and they lived happily together all their lives long.




THE DOG AND THE SPARROW

A shepherd’s dog had a master who took no care of him, but often let him
suffer the greatest hunger. At last he could bear it no longer; so he
took to his heels, and off he ran in a very sad and sorrowful mood.
On the road he met a sparrow that said to him, ‘Why are you so sad,
my friend?’ ‘Because,’ said the dog, ‘I am very very hungry, and have
nothing to eat.’ ‘If that be all,’ answered the sparrow, ‘come with me
into the next town, and I will soon find you plenty of food.’ So on they
went together into the town: and as they passed by a butcher’s shop,
the sparrow said to the dog, ‘Stand there a little while till I peck you
down a piece of meat.’ So the sparrow perched upon the shelf: and having
first looked carefully about her to see if anyone was watching her, she
pecked and scratched at a steak that lay upon the edge of the shelf,
till at last down it fell. Then the dog snapped it up, and scrambled
away with it into a corner, where he soon ate it all up. ‘Well,’ said
the sparrow, ‘you shall have some more if you will; so come with me to
the next shop, and I will peck you down another steak.’ When the dog had
eaten this too, the sparrow said to him, ‘Well, my good friend, have you
had enough now?’ ‘I have had plenty of meat,’ answered he, ‘but I should
like to have a piece of bread to eat after it.’ ‘Come with me then,’
said the sparrow, ‘and you shall soon have that too.’ So she took him
to a baker’s shop, and pecked at two rolls that lay in the window, till
they fell down: and as the dog still wished for more, she took him to
another shop and pecked down some more for him. When that was eaten, the
sparrow asked him whether he had had enough now. ‘Yes,’ said he; ‘and
now let us take a walk a little way out of the town.’ So they both went
out upon the high road; but as the weather was warm, they had not gone
far before the dog said, ‘I am very much tired--I should like to take a
nap.’ ‘Very well,’ answered the sparrow, ‘do so, and in the meantime
I will perch upon that bush.’ So the dog stretched himself out on the
road, and fell fast asleep. Whilst he slept, there came by a carter with
a cart drawn by three horses, and loaded with two casks of wine. The
sparrow, seeing that the carter did not turn out of the way, but would
go on in the track in which the dog lay, so as to drive over him, called
out, ‘Stop! stop! Mr Carter, or it shall be the worse for you.’ But the
carter, grumbling to himself, ‘You make it the worse for me, indeed!
what can you do?’ cracked his whip, and drove his cart over the poor
dog, so that the wheels crushed him to death. ‘There,’ cried the
sparrow, ‘thou cruel villain, thou hast killed my friend the dog. Now
mind what I say. This deed of thine shall cost thee all thou art worth.’
‘Do your worst, and welcome,’ said the brute, ‘what harm can you do me?’
and passed on. But the sparrow crept under the tilt of the cart, and
pecked at the bung of one of the casks till she loosened it; and then
all the wine ran out, without the carter seeing it. At last he looked
round, and saw that the cart was dripping, and the cask quite empty.
‘What an unlucky wretch I am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow, as she alighted upon the head of one of the horses, and
pecked at him till he reared up and kicked. When the carter saw this,
he drew out his hatchet and aimed a blow at the sparrow, meaning to kill
her; but she flew away, and the blow fell upon the poor horse’s head
with such force, that he fell down dead. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’
cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the sparrow. And as the carter
went on with the other two horses, she again crept under the tilt of the
cart, and pecked out the bung of the second cask, so that all the wine
ran out. When the carter saw this, he again cried out, ‘Miserable wretch
that I am!’ But the sparrow answered, ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ and
perched on the head of the second horse, and pecked at him too. The
carter ran up and struck at her again with his hatchet; but away she
flew, and the blow fell upon the second horse and killed him on the
spot. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ said he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said
the sparrow; and perching upon the third horse, she began to peck him
too. The carter was mad with fury; and without looking about him, or
caring what he was about, struck again at the sparrow; but killed his
third horse as he done the other two. ‘Alas! miserable wretch that I
am!’ cried he. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ answered the sparrow as she flew
away; ‘now will I plague and punish thee at thy own house.’ The
carter was forced at last to leave his cart behind him, and to go home
overflowing with rage and vexation. ‘Alas!’ said he to his wife, ‘what
ill luck has befallen me!--my wine is all spilt, and my horses all three
dead.’ ‘Alas! husband,’ replied she, ‘and a wicked bird has come into
the house, and has brought with her all the birds in the world, I am
sure, and they have fallen upon our corn in the loft, and are eating it
up at such a rate!’ Away ran the husband upstairs, and saw thousands of
birds sitting upon the floor eating up his corn, with the sparrow in the
midst of them. ‘Unlucky wretch that I am!’ cried the carter; for he saw
that the corn was almost all gone. ‘Not wretch enough yet!’ said the
sparrow; ‘thy cruelty shall cost thee thy life yet!’ and away she flew.

The carter seeing that he had thus lost all that he had, went down
into his kitchen; and was still not sorry for what he had done, but sat
himself angrily and sulkily in the chimney corner. But the sparrow sat
on the outside of the window, and cried ‘Carter! thy cruelty shall cost
thee thy life!’ With that he jumped up in a rage, seized his hatchet,
and threw it at the sparrow; but it missed her, and only broke the
window. The sparrow now hopped in, perched upon the window-seat, and
cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life!’ Then he became mad and
blind with rage, and struck the window-seat with such force that he
cleft it in two: and as the sparrow flew from place to place, the carter
and his wife were so furious, that they broke all their furniture,
glasses, chairs, benches, the table, and at last the walls, without
touching the bird at all. In the end, however, they caught her: and the
wife said, ‘Shall I kill her at once?’ ‘No,’ cried he, ‘that is letting
her off too easily: she shall die a much more cruel death; I will eat
her.’ But the sparrow began to flutter about, and stretch out her neck
and cried, ‘Carter! it shall cost thee thy life yet!’ With that he
could wait no longer: so he gave his wife the hatchet, and cried, ‘Wife,
strike at the bird and kill her in my hand.’ And the wife struck; but
she missed her aim, and hit her husband on the head so that he fell down
dead, and the sparrow flew quietly home to her nest.




THE TWELVE DANCING PRINCESSES

There was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters. They slept in
twelve beds all in one room; and when they went to bed, the doors were
shut and locked up; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite
worn through as if they had been danced in all night; and yet nobody
could find out how it happened, or where they had been.

Then the king made it known to all the land, that if any person could
discover the secret, and find out where it was that the princesses
danced in the night, he should have the one he liked best for his
wife, and should be king after his death; but whoever tried and did not
succeed, after three days and nights, should be put to death.

A king’s son soon came. He was well entertained, and in the evening was
taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their
twelve beds. There he was to sit and watch where they went to dance;
and, in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it, the door
of his chamber was left open. But the king’s son soon fell asleep; and
when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been
dancing, for the soles of their shoes were full of holes. The same thing
happened the second and third night: so the king ordered his head to be
cut off. After him came several others; but they had all the same luck,
and all lost their lives in the same manner.

Now it chanced that an old soldier, who had been wounded in battle
and could fight no longer, passed through the country where this king
reigned: and as he was travelling through a wood, he met an old woman,
who asked him where he was going. ‘I hardly know where I am going, or
what I had better do,’ said the soldier; ‘but I think I should like very
well to find out where it is that the princesses dance, and then in time
I might be a king.’ ‘Well,’ said the old dame, ‘that is no very hard
task: only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the
princesses will bring to you in the evening; and as soon as she leaves
you pretend to be fast asleep.’

Then she gave him a cloak, and said, ‘As soon as you put that on
you will become invisible, and you will then be able to follow the
princesses wherever they go.’ When the soldier heard all this good
counsel, he determined to try his luck: so he went to the king, and said
he was willing to undertake the task.

He was as well received as the others had been, and the king ordered
fine royal robes to be given him; and when the evening came he was led
to the outer chamber. Just as he was going to lie down, the eldest of
the princesses brought him a cup of wine; but the soldier threw it all
away secretly, taking care not to drink a drop. Then he laid himself
down on his bed, and in a little while began to snore very loud as if
he was fast asleep. When the twelve princesses heard this they laughed
heartily; and the eldest said, ‘This fellow too might have done a wiser
thing than lose his life in this way!’ Then they rose up and opened
their drawers and boxes, and took out all their fine clothes, and
dressed themselves at the glass, and skipped about as if they were eager
to begin dancing. But the youngest said, ‘I don’t know how it is, while
you are so happy I feel very uneasy; I am sure some mischance will
befall us.’ ‘You simpleton,’ said the eldest, ‘you are always afraid;
have you forgotten how many kings’ sons have already watched in vain?
And as for this soldier, even if I had not given him his sleeping
draught, he would have slept soundly enough.’

When they were all ready, they went and looked at the soldier; but he
snored on, and did not stir hand or foot: so they thought they were
quite safe; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands,
and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open. The soldier
saw them going down through the trap-door one after another, the eldest
leading the way; and thinking he had no time to lose, he jumped up, put
on the cloak which the old woman had given him, and followed them;
but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest
princess, and she cried out to her sisters, ‘All is not right; someone
took hold of my gown.’ ‘You silly creature!’ said the eldest, ‘it is
nothing but a nail in the wall.’ Then down they all went, and at the
bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees; and
the leaves were all of silver, and glittered and sparkled beautifully.
The soldier wished to take away some token of the place; so he broke
off a little branch, and there came a loud noise from the tree. Then the
youngest daughter said again, ‘I am sure all is not right--did not you
hear that noise? That never happened before.’ But the eldest said, ‘It
is only our princes, who are shouting for joy at our approach.’

Then they came to another grove of trees, where all the leaves were of
gold; and afterwards to a third, where the leaves were all glittering
diamonds. And the soldier broke a branch from each; and every time there
was a loud noise, which made the youngest sister tremble with fear; but
the eldest still said, it was only the princes, who were crying for joy.
So they went on till they came to a great lake; and at the side of the
lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them,
who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses.

One of the princesses went into each boat, and the soldier stepped into
the same boat with the youngest. As they were rowing over the lake, the
prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier
said, ‘I do not know why it is, but though I am rowing with all my might
we do not get on so fast as usual, and I am quite tired: the boat
seems very heavy today.’ ‘It is only the heat of the weather,’ said the
princess: ‘I feel it very warm too.’

On the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle, from
which came the merry music of horns and trumpets. There they all landed,
and went into the castle, and each prince danced with his princess; and
the soldier, who was all the time invisible, danced with them too; and
when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her, he drank it
all up, so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty. At this,
too, the youngest sister was terribly frightened, but the eldest always
silenced her. They danced on till three o’clock in the morning, and then
all their shoes were worn out, so that they were obliged to leave off.
The princes rowed them back again over the lake (but this time the
soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess); and on the
opposite shore they took leave of each other, the princesses promising
to come again the next night.

When they came to the stairs, the soldier ran on before the princesses,
and laid himself down; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very
much tired, they heard him snoring in his bed; so they said, ‘Now all
is quite safe’; then they undressed themselves, put away their fine
clothes, pulled off their shoes, and went to bed. In the morning the
soldier said nothing about what had happened, but determined to see more
of this strange adventure, and went again the second and third night;
and every thing happened just as before; the princesses danced each time
till their shoes were worn to pieces, and then returned home. However,
on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a
token of where he had been.

As soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret, he was taken
before the king with the three branches and the golden cup; and the
twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would
say. And when the king asked him. ‘Where do my twelve daughters dance at
night?’ he answered, ‘With twelve princes in a castle under ground.’ And
then he told the king all that had happened, and showed him the three
branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him. Then the king
called for the princesses, and asked them whether what the soldier said
was true: and when they saw that they were discovered, and that it was
of no use to deny what had happened, they confessed it all. And the king
asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife; and he
answered, ‘I am not very young, so I will have the eldest.’--And they
were married that very day, and the soldier was chosen to be the king’s
heir.




THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

There was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty, close
by the seaside. The fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing; and
one day, as he sat on the shore with his rod, looking at the sparkling
waves and watching his line, all on a sudden his float was dragged away
deep into the water: and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish.
But the fish said, ‘Pray let me live! I am not a real fish; I am an
enchanted prince: put me in the water again, and let me go!’ ‘Oh, ho!’
said the man, ‘you need not make so many words about the matter; I will
have nothing to do with a fish that can talk: so swim away, sir, as soon
as you please!’ Then he put him back into the water, and the fish darted
straight down to the bottom, and left a long streak of blood behind him
on the wave.

When the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty, he told her how
he had caught a great fish, and how it had told him it was an enchanted
prince, and how, on hearing it speak, he had let it go again. ‘Did not
you ask it for anything?’ said the wife, ‘we live very wretchedly here,
in this nasty dirty pigsty; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug
little cottage.’

The fisherman did not much like the business: however, he went to the
seashore; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and
green. And he stood at the water’s edge, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

Then the fish came swimming to him, and said, ‘Well, what is her will?
What does your wife want?’ ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘she says that when
I had caught you, I ought to have asked you for something before I let
you go; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty, and wants
a snug little cottage.’ ‘Go home, then,’ said the fish; ‘she is in the
cottage already!’ So the man went home, and saw his wife standing at the
door of a nice trim little cottage. ‘Come in, come in!’ said she; ‘is
not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had?’ And there was a
parlour, and a bedchamber, and a kitchen; and behind the cottage there
was a little garden, planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits; and
there was a courtyard behind, full of ducks and chickens. ‘Ah!’ said the
fisherman, ‘how happily we shall live now!’ ‘We will try to do so, at
least,’ said his wife.

Everything went right for a week or two, and then Dame Ilsabill said,
‘Husband, there is not near room enough for us in this cottage; the
courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small; I should like to
have a large stone castle to live in: go to the fish again and tell him
to give us a castle.’ ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘I don’t like to go to
him again, for perhaps he will be angry; we ought to be easy with this
pretty cottage to live in.’ ‘Nonsense!’ said the wife; ‘he will do it
very willingly, I know; go along and try!’

The fisherman went, but his heart was very heavy: and when he came to
the sea, it looked blue and gloomy, though it was very calm; and he went
close to the edge of the waves, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the man,
dolefully, ‘my wife wants to live in a stone castle.’ ‘Go home, then,’
said the fish; ‘she is standing at the gate of it already.’ So away went
the fisherman, and found his wife standing before the gate of a great
castle. ‘See,’ said she, ‘is not this grand?’ With that they went into
the castle together, and found a great many servants there, and the
rooms all richly furnished, and full of golden chairs and tables; and
behind the castle was a garden, and around it was a park half a
mile long, full of sheep, and goats, and hares, and deer; and in the
courtyard were stables and cow-houses. ‘Well,’ said the man, ‘now we
will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of
our lives.’ ‘Perhaps we may,’ said the wife; ‘but let us sleep upon it,
before we make up our minds to that.’ So they went to bed.

The next morning when Dame Ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight, and
she jogged the fisherman with her elbow, and said, ‘Get up, husband,
and bestir yourself, for we must be king of all the land.’ ‘Wife, wife,’
said the man, ‘why should we wish to be the king? I will not be king.’
‘Then I will,’ said she. ‘But, wife,’ said the fisherman, ‘how can you
be king--the fish cannot make you a king?’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘say
no more about it, but go and try! I will be king.’ So the man went away
quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king. This time
the sea looked a dark grey colour, and was overspread with curling waves
and the ridges of foam as he cried out:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘Well, what would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Alas!’ said the poor
man, ‘my wife wants to be king.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is king
already.’

Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace he saw
a troop of soldiers, and heard the sound of drums and trumpets. And when
he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds,
with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her stood six
fair maidens, each a head taller than the other. ‘Well, wife,’ said the
fisherman, ‘are you king?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am king.’ And when he had
looked at her for a long time, he said, ‘Ah, wife! what a fine thing it
is to be king! Now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long
as we live.’ ‘I don’t know how that may be,’ said she; ‘never is a long
time. I am king, it is true; but I begin to be tired of that, and I
think I should like to be emperor.’ ‘Alas, wife! why should you wish to
be emperor?’ said the fisherman. ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘go to the fish!
I say I will be emperor.’ ‘Ah, wife!’ replied the fisherman, ‘the fish
cannot make an emperor, I am sure, and I should not like to ask him for
such a thing.’ ‘I am king,’ said Ilsabill, ‘and you are my slave; so go
at once!’

So the fisherman was forced to go; and he muttered as he went along,
‘This will come to no good, it is too much to ask; the fish will be
tired at last, and then we shall be sorry for what we have done.’ He
soon came to the seashore; and the water was quite black and muddy, and
a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about, but he
went as near as he could to the water’s brink, and said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What would she have now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman,
‘she wants to be emperor.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is emperor
already.’

So he went home again; and as he came near he saw his wife Ilsabill
sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold, with a great crown on
her head full two yards high; and on each side of her stood her guards
and attendants in a row, each one smaller than the other, from the
tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger. And
before her stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went
up to her and said, ‘Wife, are you emperor?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am
emperor.’ ‘Ah!’ said the man, as he gazed upon her, ‘what a fine thing
it is to be emperor!’ ‘Husband,’ said she, ‘why should we stop at being
emperor? I will be pope next.’ ‘O wife, wife!’ said he, ‘how can you be
pope? there is but one pope at a time in Christendom.’ ‘Husband,’ said
she, ‘I will be pope this very day.’ ‘But,’ replied the husband, ‘the
fish cannot make you pope.’ ‘What nonsense!’ said she; ‘if he can make
an emperor, he can make a pope: go and try him.’

So the fisherman went. But when he came to the shore the wind was raging
and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves, and the ships were
in trouble, and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows. In the
middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky, but towards
the south all was red, as if a dreadful storm was rising. At this sight
the fisherman was dreadfully frightened, and he trembled so that his
knees knocked together: but still he went down near to the shore, and
said:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said the fisherman, ‘my
wife wants to be pope.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish; ‘she is pope already.’

Then the fisherman went home, and found Ilsabill sitting on a throne
that was two miles high. And she had three great crowns on her head, and
around her stood all the pomp and power of the Church. And on each side
of her were two rows of burning lights, of all sizes, the greatest as
large as the highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no
larger than a small rushlight. ‘Wife,’ said the fisherman, as he looked
at all this greatness, ‘are you pope?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘I am pope.’
‘Well, wife,’ replied he, ‘it is a grand thing to be pope; and now
you must be easy, for you can be nothing greater.’ ‘I will think about
that,’ said the wife. Then they went to bed: but Dame Ilsabill could not
sleep all night for thinking what she should be next. At last, as she
was dropping asleep, morning broke, and the sun rose. ‘Ha!’ thought she,
as she woke up and looked at it through the window, ‘after all I cannot
prevent the sun rising.’ At this thought she was very angry, and wakened
her husband, and said, ‘Husband, go to the fish and tell him I must
be lord of the sun and moon.’ The fisherman was half asleep, but the
thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed.
‘Alas, wife!’ said he, ‘cannot you be easy with being pope?’ ‘No,’
said she, ‘I am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my
leave. Go to the fish at once!’

Then the man went shivering with fear; and as he was going down to
the shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the very rocks
shook. And all the heavens became black with stormy clouds, and the
lightnings played, and the thunders rolled; and you might have seen in
the sea great black waves, swelling up like mountains with crowns of
white foam upon their heads. And the fisherman crept towards the sea,
and cried out, as well as he could:

 ‘O man of the sea!
  Hearken to me!
  My wife Ilsabill
  Will have her own will,
  And hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!’

‘What does she want now?’ said the fish. ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘she wants to
be lord of the sun and moon.’ ‘Go home,’ said the fish, ‘to your pigsty
again.’

And there they live to this very day.




THE WILLOW-WREN AND THE BEAR

Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,
and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said: ‘Brother
wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?’ ‘That is the King of birds,’
said the wolf, ‘before whom we must bow down.’ In reality the bird was
the willow-wren. ‘IF that’s the case,’ said the bear, ‘I should very
much like to see his royal palace; come, take me thither.’ ‘That is not
done quite as you seem to think,’ said the wolf; ‘you must wait until
the Queen comes,’ Soon afterwards, the Queen arrived with some food in
her beak, and the lord King came too, and they began to feed their young
ones. The bear would have liked to go at once, but the wolf held him
back by the sleeve, and said: ‘No, you must wait until the lord and lady
Queen have gone away again.’ So they took stock of the hole where the
nest lay, and trotted away. The bear, however, could not rest until he
had seen the royal palace, and when a short time had passed, went to it
again. The King and Queen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw
five or six young ones lying there. ‘Is that the royal palace?’ cried
the bear; ‘it is a wretched palace, and you are not King’s children, you
are disreputable children!’ When the young wrens heard that, they were
frightfully angry, and screamed: ‘No, that we are not! Our parents are
honest people! Bear, you will have to pay for that!’

The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went into their
holes. The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry and scream, and
when their parents again brought food they said: ‘We will not so much as
touch one fly’s leg, no, not if we were dying of hunger, until you have
settled whether we are respectable children or not; the bear has been
here and has insulted us!’ Then the old King said: ‘Be easy, he shall
be punished,’ and he at once flew with the Queen to the bear’s cave, and
called in: ‘Old Growler, why have you insulted my children? You shall
suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war.’ Thus war was
announced to the Bear, and all four-footed animals were summoned to take
part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every other animal the earth
contained. And the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the
air, not only birds, large and small, but midges, and hornets, bees and
flies had to come.

When the time came for the war to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies
to discover who was the enemy’s commander-in-chief. The gnat, who was
the most crafty, flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled,
and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be
announced. There stood the bear, and he called the fox before him
and said: ‘Fox, you are the most cunning of all animals, you shall be
general and lead us.’ ‘Good,’ said the fox, ‘but what signal shall we
agree upon?’ No one knew that, so the fox said: ‘I have a fine long
bushy tail, which almost looks like a plume of red feathers. When I lift
my tail up quite high, all is going well, and you must charge; but if I
let it hang down, run away as fast as you can.’ When the gnat had heard
that, she flew away again, and revealed everything, down to the minutest
detail, to the willow-wren. When day broke, and the battle was to begin,
all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the
earth trembled. The willow-wren with his army also came flying through
the air with such a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one
was uneasy and afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each
other. But the willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle
beneath the fox’s tail, and sting with all his might. When the fox felt
the first string, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but
he bore it, and still kept his tail high in the air; at the second
sting, he was forced to put it down for a moment; at the third, he could
hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between his legs. When
the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and began to flee, each
into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.

Then the King and Queen flew home to their children and cried:
‘Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart’s content, we have won
the battle!’ But the young wrens said: ‘We will not eat yet, the bear
must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable
children, before we will do that.’ Then the willow-wren flew to the
bear’s hole and cried: ‘Growler, you are to come to the nest to my
children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of your body shall
be broken.’ So the bear crept thither in the greatest fear, and begged
their pardon. And now at last the young wrens were satisfied, and sat
down together and ate and drank, and made merry till quite late into the
night.




THE FROG-PRINCE

One fine evening a young princess put on her bonnet and clogs, and went
out to take a walk by herself in a wood; and when she came to a cool
spring of water, that rose in the midst of it, she sat herself down
to rest a while. Now she had a golden ball in her hand, which was her
favourite plaything; and she was always tossing it up into the air, and
catching it again as it fell. After a time she threw it up so high that
she missed catching it as it fell; and the ball bounded away, and rolled
along upon the ground, till at last it fell down into the spring. The
princess looked into the spring after her ball, but it was very deep, so
deep that she could not see the bottom of it. Then she began to bewail
her loss, and said, ‘Alas! if I could only get my ball again, I would
give all my fine clothes and jewels, and everything that I have in the
world.’

Whilst she was speaking, a frog put its head out of the water, and said,
‘Princess, why do you weep so bitterly?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘what can you
do for me, you nasty frog? My golden ball has fallen into the spring.’
The frog said, ‘I want not your pearls, and jewels, and fine clothes;
but if you will love me, and let me live with you and eat from off
your golden plate, and sleep upon your bed, I will bring you your ball
again.’ ‘What nonsense,’ thought the princess, ‘this silly frog is
talking! He can never even get out of the spring to visit me, though
he may be able to get my ball for me, and therefore I will tell him he
shall have what he asks.’ So she said to the frog, ‘Well, if you will
bring me my ball, I will do all you ask.’ Then the frog put his head
down, and dived deep under the water; and after a little while he came
up again, with the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the edge of the
spring. As soon as the young princess saw her ball, she ran to pick
it up; and she was so overjoyed to have it in her hand again, that she
never thought of the frog, but ran home with it as fast as she could.
The frog called after her, ‘Stay, princess, and take me with you as you
said,’ But she did not stop to hear a word.

The next day, just as the princess had sat down to dinner, she heard a
strange noise--tap, tap--plash, plash--as if something was coming up the
marble staircase: and soon afterwards there was a gentle knock at the
door, and a little voice cried out and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the princess ran to the door and opened it, and there she saw
the frog, whom she had quite forgotten. At this sight she was sadly
frightened, and shutting the door as fast as she could came back to her
seat. The king, her father, seeing that something had frightened her,
asked her what was the matter. ‘There is a nasty frog,’ said she, ‘at
the door, that lifted my ball for me out of the spring this morning: I
told him that he should live with me here, thinking that he could never
get out of the spring; but there he is at the door, and he wants to come
in.’

While she was speaking the frog knocked again at the door, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

Then the king said to the young princess, ‘As you have given your word
you must keep it; so go and let him in.’ She did so, and the frog hopped
into the room, and then straight on--tap, tap--plash, plash--from the
bottom of the room to the top, till he came up close to the table where
the princess sat. ‘Pray lift me upon chair,’ said he to the princess,
‘and let me sit next to you.’ As soon as she had done this, the frog
said, ‘Put your plate nearer to me, that I may eat out of it.’ This
she did, and when he had eaten as much as he could, he said, ‘Now I am
tired; carry me upstairs, and put me into your bed.’ And the princess,
though very unwilling, took him up in her hand, and put him upon the
pillow of her own bed, where he slept all night long. As soon as it was
light he jumped up, hopped downstairs, and went out of the house.
‘Now, then,’ thought the princess, ‘at last he is gone, and I shall be
troubled with him no more.’

But she was mistaken; for when night came again she heard the same
tapping at the door; and the frog came once more, and said:

 ‘Open the door, my princess dear,
  Open the door to thy true love here!
  And mind the words that thou and I said
  By the fountain cool, in the greenwood shade.’

And when the princess opened the door the frog came in, and slept upon
her pillow as before, till the morning broke. And the third night he did
the same. But when the princess awoke on the following morning she was
astonished to see, instead of the frog, a handsome prince, gazing on her
with the most beautiful eyes she had ever seen, and standing at the head
of her bed.

He told her that he had been enchanted by a spiteful fairy, who had
changed him into a frog; and that he had been fated so to abide till
some princess should take him out of the spring, and let him eat from
her plate, and sleep upon her bed for three nights. ‘You,’ said the
prince, ‘have broken his cruel charm, and now I have nothing to wish for
but that you should go with me into my father’s kingdom, where I will
marry you, and love you as long as you live.’

The young princess, you may be sure, was not long in saying ‘Yes’ to
all this; and as they spoke a gay coach drove up, with eight beautiful
horses, decked with plumes of feathers and a golden harness; and behind
the coach rode the prince’s servant, faithful Heinrich, who had bewailed
the misfortunes of his dear master during his enchantment so long and so
bitterly, that his heart had well-nigh burst.

They then took leave of the king, and got into the coach with eight
horses, and all set out, full of joy and merriment, for the prince’s
kingdom, which they reached safely; and there they lived happily a great
many years.




CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP

A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and had said so much
to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her, that at
length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together.
‘But we must make a provision for winter, or else we shall suffer
from hunger,’ said the cat; ‘and you, little mouse, cannot venture
everywhere, or you will be caught in a trap some day.’ The good advice
was followed, and a pot of fat was bought, but they did not know where
to put it. At length, after much consideration, the cat said: ‘I know no
place where it will be better stored up than in the church, for no one
dares take anything away from there. We will set it beneath the altar,
and not touch it until we are really in need of it.’ So the pot was
placed in safety, but it was not long before the cat had a great
yearning for it, and said to the mouse: ‘I want to tell you something,
little mouse; my cousin has brought a little son into the world, and has
asked me to be godmother; he is white with brown spots, and I am to hold
him over the font at the christening. Let me go out today, and you look
after the house by yourself.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ answered the mouse, ‘by all
means go, and if you get anything very good to eat, think of me. I
should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.’ All this,
however, was untrue; the cat had no cousin, and had not been asked to
be godmother. She went straight to the church, stole to the pot of fat,
began to lick at it, and licked the top of the fat off. Then she took a
walk upon the roofs of the town, looked out for opportunities, and then
stretched herself in the sun, and licked her lips whenever she thought
of the pot of fat, and not until it was evening did she return home.
‘Well, here you are again,’ said the mouse, ‘no doubt you have had a
merry day.’ ‘All went off well,’ answered the cat. ‘What name did they
give the child?’ ‘Top off!’ said the cat quite coolly. ‘Top off!’ cried
the mouse, ‘that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in
your family?’ ‘What does that matter,’ said the cat, ‘it is no worse
than Crumb-stealer, as your godchildren are called.’

Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning. She said to
the mouse: ‘You must do me a favour, and once more manage the house for
a day alone. I am again asked to be godmother, and, as the child has a
white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.’ The good mouse consented,
but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church, and devoured
half the pot of fat. ‘Nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to
oneself,’ said she, and was quite satisfied with her day’s work. When
she went home the mouse inquired: ‘And what was the child christened?’
‘Half-done,’ answered the cat. ‘Half-done! What are you saying? I
never heard the name in my life, I’ll wager anything it is not in the
calendar!’

The cat’s mouth soon began to water for some more licking. ‘All good
things go in threes,’ said she, ‘I am asked to stand godmother again.
The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but with that
exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body; this only
happens once every few years, you will let me go, won’t you?’ ‘Top-off!
Half-done!’ answered the mouse, ‘they are such odd names, they make me
very thoughtful.’ ‘You sit at home,’ said the cat, ‘in your dark-grey
fur coat and long tail, and are filled with fancies, that’s because
you do not go out in the daytime.’ During the cat’s absence the mouse
cleaned the house, and put it in order, but the greedy cat entirely
emptied the pot of fat. ‘When everything is eaten up one has some
peace,’ said she to herself, and well filled and fat she did not return
home till night. The mouse at once asked what name had been given to
the third child. ‘It will not please you more than the others,’ said the
cat. ‘He is called All-gone.’ ‘All-gone,’ cried the mouse ‘that is the
most suspicious name of all! I have never seen it in print. All-gone;
what can that mean?’ and she shook her head, curled herself up, and lay
down to sleep.

From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, but
when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found
outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said: ‘Come, cat,
we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we
shall enjoy that.’ ‘Yes,’ answered the cat, ‘you will enjoy it as much
as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the
window.’ They set out on their way, but when they arrived, the pot of
fat certainly was still in its place, but it was empty. ‘Alas!’ said the
mouse, ‘now I see what has happened, now it comes to light! You are a true
friend! You have devoured all when you were standing godmother. First
top off, then half-done, then--’ ‘Will you hold your tongue,’ cried the
cat, ‘one word more, and I will eat you too.’ ‘All-gone’ was already on
the poor mouse’s lips; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang
on her, seized her, and swallowed her down. Verily, that is the way of
the world.




THE GOOSE-GIRL

The king of a great land died, and left his queen to take care of their
only child. This child was a daughter, who was very beautiful; and her
mother loved her dearly, and was very kind to her. And there was a good
fairy too, who was fond of the princess, and helped her mother to watch
over her. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a
great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she
got ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen her
mother, packed up a great many costly things; jewels, and gold, and
silver; trinkets, fine dresses, and in short everything that became a
royal bride. And she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her, and give
her into the bridegroom’s hands; and each had a horse for the journey.
Now the princess’s horse was the fairy’s gift, and it was called Falada,
and could speak.

When the time came for them to set out, the fairy went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to the princess, and said, ‘Take care of it, dear child; for
it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road.’ Then they all took
a sorrowful leave of the princess; and she put the lock of hair into
her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on her journey to her
bridegroom’s kingdom.

One day, as they were riding along by a brook, the princess began to
feel very thirsty: and she said to her maid, ‘Pray get down, and fetch
me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook, for I want to
drink.’ ‘Nay,’ said the maid, ‘if you are thirsty, get off yourself, and
stoop down by the water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid any
longer.’ Then she was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt over the
little brook, and drank; for she was frightened, and dared not bring out
her golden cup; and she wept and said, ‘Alas! what will become of me?’
And the lock answered her, and said:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

But the princess was very gentle and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid’s ill behaviour, but got upon her horse again.

Then all rode farther on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid’s rude
speech, and said, ‘Pray get down, and fetch me some water to drink in
my golden cup.’ But the maid answered her, and even spoke more haughtily
than before: ‘Drink if you will, but I shall not be your waiting-maid.’
Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse, and lay
down, and held her head over the running stream, and cried and said,
‘What will become of me?’ And the lock of hair answered her again:

 ‘Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom,
and floated away with the water. Now she was so frightened that she did
not see it; but her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power, now that
she had lost the hair. So when the bride had done drinking, and would
have got upon Falada again, the maid said, ‘I shall ride upon Falada,
and you may have my horse instead’; so she was forced to give up her
horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her
maid’s shabby ones.

At last, as they drew near the end of their journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had
happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well.

Then the waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride rode upon the
other horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came to the
royal court. There was great joy at their coming, and the prince flew to
meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one
who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber;
but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.

Now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do; so he
amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window, looking at what was
going on; and he saw her in the courtyard. As she looked very pretty,
and too delicate for a waiting-maid, he went up into the royal chamber
to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her, that was thus left
standing in the court below. ‘I brought her with me for the sake of her
company on the road,’ said she; ‘pray give the girl some work to do,
that she may not be idle.’ The old king could not for some time think
of any work for her to do; but at last he said, ‘I have a lad who takes
care of my geese; she may go and help him.’ Now the name of this lad,
that the real bride was to help in watching the king’s geese, was
Curdken.

But the false bride said to the prince, ‘Dear husband, pray do me one
piece of kindness.’ ‘That I will,’ said the prince. ‘Then tell one of
your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon, for it
was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road’; but the truth was,
she was very much afraid lest Falada should some day or other speak, and
tell all she had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the
faithful Falada was killed; but when the true princess heard of it, she
wept, and begged the man to nail up Falada’s head against a large
dark gate of the city, through which she had to pass every morning
and evening, that there she might still see him sometimes. Then the
slaughterer said he would do as she wished; and cut off the head, and
nailed it up under the dark gate.

Early the next morning, as she and Curdken went out through the gate,
she said sorrowfully:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then they went out of the city, and drove the geese on. And when she
came to the meadow, she sat down upon a bank there, and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure silver; and when Curdken
saw it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of the
locks out, but she cried:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken’s hat; and
away it flew over the hills: and he was forced to turn and run after
it; till, by the time he came back, she had done combing and curling her
hair, and had put it up again safe. Then he was very angry and sulky,
and would not speak to her at all; but they watched the geese until it
grew dark in the evening, and then drove them homewards.

The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada’s head, and cried:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answered:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

Then she drove on the geese, and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out her hair as before; and Curdken ran up to her, and wanted to
take hold of it; but she cried out quickly:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

Then the wind came and blew away his hat; and off it flew a great way,
over the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it; and when
he came back she had bound up her hair again, and all was safe. So they
watched the geese till it grew dark.

In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king, and
said, ‘I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any
longer.’ ‘Why?’ said the king. ‘Because, instead of doing any good, she
does nothing but tease me all day long.’ Then the king made him tell him
what had happened. And Curdken said, ‘When we go in the morning through
the dark gate with our flock of geese, she cries and talks with the head
of a horse that hangs upon the wall, and says:

 ‘Falada, Falada, there thou hangest!’

and the head answers:

 ‘Bride, bride, there thou gangest!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly, would she rue it.’

And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; how his hat was blown away; and how he was forced
to run after it, and to leave his flock of geese to themselves. But the
old king told the boy to go out again the next day: and when morning
came, he placed himself behind the dark gate, and heard how she spoke
to Falada, and how Falada answered. Then he went into the field, and
hid himself in a bush by the meadow’s side; and he soon saw with his own
eyes how they drove the flock of geese; and how, after a little time,
she let down her hair that glittered in the sun. And then he heard her
say:

 ‘Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken’s hat go!
  Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O’er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl’d
  Till the silvery locks
  Are all comb’d and curl’d!

And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken’s hat, and away
went Curdken after it, while the girl went on combing and curling her
hair. All this the old king saw: so he went home without being seen; and
when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside,
and asked her why she did so: but she burst into tears, and said, ‘That
I must not tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life.’

But the old king begged so hard, that she had no peace till she had told
him all the tale, from beginning to end, word for word. And it was very
lucky for her that she did so, for when she had done the king ordered
royal clothes to be put upon her, and gazed on her with wonder, she was
so beautiful. Then he called his son and told him that he had only a
false bride; for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true
bride stood by. And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and
heard how meek and patient she had been; and without saying anything to
the false bride, the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all
his court. The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one
side, and the true one on the other; but nobody knew her again, for her
beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes; and she did not seem at all
like the little goose-girl, now that she had her brilliant dress on.

When they had eaten and drank, and were very merry, the old king said
he would tell them a tale. So he began, and told all the story of the
princess, as if it was one that he had once heard; and he asked the
true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus. ‘Nothing better,’ said this false bride, ‘than that she
should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails, and that
two white horses should be put to it, and should drag it from street to
street till she was dead.’ ‘Thou art she!’ said the old king; ‘and as
thou has judged thyself, so shall it be done to thee.’ And the young
king was then married to his true wife, and they reigned over the
kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives; and the good fairy came
to see them, and restored the faithful Falada to life again.




THE ADVENTURES OF CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET


1. HOW THEY WENT TO THE MOUNTAINS TO EAT NUTS

‘The nuts are quite ripe now,’ said Chanticleer to his wife Partlet,
‘suppose we go together to the mountains, and eat as many as we can,
before the squirrel takes them all away.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
Partlet, ‘let us go and make a holiday of it together.’

So they went to the mountains; and as it was a lovely day, they stayed
there till the evening. Now, whether it was that they had eaten so many
nuts that they could not walk, or whether they were lazy and would not,
I do not know: however, they took it into their heads that it did not
become them to go home on foot. So Chanticleer began to build a little
carriage of nutshells: and when it was finished, Partlet jumped into
it and sat down, and bid Chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her
home. ‘That’s a good joke!’ said Chanticleer; ‘no, that will never do;
I had rather by half walk home; I’ll sit on the box and be coachman,
if you like, but I’ll not draw.’ While this was passing, a duck came
quacking up and cried out, ‘You thieving vagabonds, what business have
you in my grounds? I’ll give it you well for your insolence!’ and upon
that she fell upon Chanticleer most lustily. But Chanticleer was no
coward, and returned the duck’s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely
that she soon began to cry out for mercy; which was only granted her
upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them. This she
agreed to do; and Chanticleer got upon the box, and drove, crying, ‘Now,
duck, get on as fast as you can.’ And away they went at a pretty good
pace.

After they had travelled along a little way, they met a needle and a pin
walking together along the road: and the needle cried out, ‘Stop, stop!’
and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way, and such
dirty walking they could not get on at all: he told them that he and his
friend, the pin, had been at a public-house a few miles off, and had sat
drinking till they had forgotten how late it was; he begged therefore
that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their
carriage. Chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows, and not
likely to take up much room, told them they might ride, but made them
promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in, nor to
tread on Partlet’s toes.

Late at night they arrived at an inn; and as it was bad travelling in
the dark, and the duck seemed much tired, and waddled about a good
deal from one side to the other, they made up their minds to fix their
quarters there: but the landlord at first was unwilling, and said his
house was full, thinking they might not be very respectable company:
however, they spoke civilly to him, and gave him the egg which Partlet
had laid by the way, and said they would give him the duck, who was in
the habit of laying one every day: so at last he let them come in, and
they bespoke a handsome supper, and spent the evening very jollily.

Early in the morning, before it was quite light, and when nobody was
stirring in the inn, Chanticleer awakened his wife, and, fetching the
egg, they pecked a hole in it, ate it up, and threw the shells into the
fireplace: they then went to the pin and needle, who were fast asleep,
and seizing them by the heads, stuck one into the landlord’s easy chair
and the other into his handkerchief; and, having done this, they crept
away as softly as possible. However, the duck, who slept in the open
air in the yard, heard them coming, and jumping into the brook which ran
close by the inn, soon swam out of their reach.

An hour or two afterwards the landlord got up, and took his handkerchief
to wipe his face, but the pin ran into him and pricked him: then he
walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire, but when he
stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes, and almost blinded him.
‘Bless me!’ said he, ‘all the world seems to have a design against my
head this morning’: and so saying, he threw himself sulkily into his
easy chair; but, oh dear! the needle ran into him; and this time the
pain was not in his head. He now flew into a very great passion, and,
suspecting the company who had come in the night before, he went to look
after them, but they were all off; so he swore that he never again
would take in such a troop of vagabonds, who ate a great deal, paid no
reckoning, and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks.


2. HOW CHANTICLEER AND PARTLET WENT TO VISIT MR KORBES

Another day, Chanticleer and Partlet wished to ride out together;
so Chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels, and
harnessed six mice to it; and then he and Partlet got into the carriage,
and away they drove. Soon afterwards a cat met them, and said, ‘Where
are you going?’ And Chanticleer replied,

 ‘All on our way
  A visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Then the cat said, ‘Take me with you,’ Chanticleer said, ‘With all my
heart: get up behind, and be sure you do not fall off.’

 ‘Take care of this handsome coach of mine,
  Nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine!
  Now, mice, be ready,
  And, wheels, run steady!
  For we are going a visit to pay
  To Mr Korbes, the fox, today.’

Soon after came up a millstone, an egg, a duck, and a pin; and
Chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with
them.

When they arrived at Mr Korbes’s house, he was not at home; so the mice
drew the carriage into the coach-house, Chanticleer and Partlet flew
upon a beam, the cat sat down in the fireplace, the duck got into
the washing cistern, the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow, the
millstone laid himself over the house door, and the egg rolled himself
up in the towel.

When Mr Korbes came home, he went to the fireplace to make a fire; but
the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes: so he ran to the kitchen to
wash himself; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face; and
when he tried to wipe himself, the egg broke to pieces in the towel all
over his face and eyes. Then he was very angry, and went without his
supper to bed; but when he laid his head on the pillow, the pin ran into
his cheek: at this he became quite furious, and, jumping up, would have
run out of the house; but when he came to the door, the millstone fell
down on his head, and killed him on the spot.


3. HOW PARTLET DIED AND WAS BURIED, AND HOW CHANTICLEER DIED OF GRIEF

Another day Chanticleer and Partlet agreed to go again to the mountains
to eat nuts; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found
should be shared equally between them. Now Partlet found a very large
nut; but she said nothing about it to Chanticleer, and kept it all to
herself: however, it was so big that she could not swallow it, and it
stuck in her throat. Then she was in a great fright, and cried out to
Chanticleer, ‘Pray run as fast as you can, and fetch me some water, or I
shall be choked.’ Chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river, and
said, ‘River, give me some water, for Partlet lies in the mountain, and
will be choked by a great nut.’ The river said, ‘Run first to the bride,
and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water.’ Chanticleer ran to
the bride, and said, ‘Bride, you must give me a silken cord, for then
the river will give me water, and the water I will carry to Partlet, who
lies on the mountain, and will be choked by a great nut.’ But the bride
said, ‘Run first, and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow
in the garden.’ Then Chanticleer ran to the garden, and took the garland
from the bough where it hung, and brought it to the bride; and then
the bride gave him the silken cord, and he took the silken cord to
the river, and the river gave him water, and he carried the water to
Partlet; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut, and lay
quite dead, and never moved any more.

Then Chanticleer was very sorry, and cried bitterly; and all the beasts
came and wept with him over poor Partlet. And six mice built a little
hearse to carry her to her grave; and when it was ready they harnessed
themselves before it, and Chanticleer drove them. On the way they
met the fox. ‘Where are you going, Chanticleer?’ said he. ‘To bury my
Partlet,’ said the other. ‘May I go with you?’ said the fox. ‘Yes; but
you must get up behind, or my horses will not be able to draw you.’ Then
the fox got up behind; and presently the wolf, the bear, the goat, and
all the beasts of the wood, came and climbed upon the hearse.

So on they went till they came to a rapid stream. ‘How shall we get
over?’ said Chanticleer. Then said a straw, ‘I will lay myself across,
and you may pass over upon me.’ But as the mice were going over, the
straw slipped away and fell into the water, and the six mice all fell in
and were drowned. What was to be done? Then a large log of wood came
and said, ‘I am big enough; I will lay myself across the stream, and you
shall pass over upon me.’ So he laid himself down; but they managed
so clumsily, that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the
stream. Then a stone, who saw what had happened, came up and kindly
offered to help poor Chanticleer by laying himself across the stream;
and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse, and
managed to get Partlet out of it; but the fox and the other mourners,
who were sitting behind, were too heavy, and fell back into the water
and were all carried away by the stream and drowned.

Thus Chanticleer was left alone with his dead Partlet; and having dug
a grave for her, he laid her in it, and made a little hillock over her.
Then he sat down by the grave, and wept and mourned, till at last he
died too; and so all were dead.




RAPUNZEL

There were once a man and a woman who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length the woman hoped that God was about to grant her desire.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was
standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a
bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it
looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, she quite pined away,
and began to look pale and miserable. Then her husband was alarmed, and
asked: ‘What ails you, dear wife?’ ‘Ah,’ she replied, ‘if I can’t eat
some of the rampion, which is in the garden behind our house, I shall
die.’ The man, who loved her, thought: ‘Sooner than let your wife die,
bring her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.’
At twilight, he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the
enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily. It
tasted so good to her--so very good, that the next day she longed for it
three times as much as before. If he was to have any rest, her husband
must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom of evening
therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had clambered down the
wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the enchantress standing before
him. ‘How can you dare,’ said she with angry look, ‘descend into my
garden and steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!’
‘Ah,’ answered he, ‘let mercy take the place of justice, I only made
up my mind to do it out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the
window, and felt such a longing for it that she would have died if she
had not got some to eat.’ Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be
softened, and said to him: ‘If the case be as you say, I will allow
you to take away with you as much rampion as you will, only I make one
condition, you must give me the child which your wife will bring into
the world; it shall be well treated, and I will care for it like a
mother.’ The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the
woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once, gave the
child the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun. When she was
twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a
little window. When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath it and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses,
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair
fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the king’s son rode through
the forest and passed by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her
solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound. The king’s
son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of the tower,
but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply
touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and
listened to it. Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw
that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress
climbed up to her. ‘If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I too
will try my fortune,’ said he, and the next day when it began to grow
dark, he went to the tower and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

Immediately the hair fell down and the king’s son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her; but the king’s son began to talk to
her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred
that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought: ‘He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does’; and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his. She said: ‘I will willingly go away with
you, but I do not know how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk
every time that you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when
that is ready I will descend, and you will take me on your horse.’ They
agreed that until that time he should come to her every evening, for the
old woman came by day. The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until
once Rapunzel said to her: ‘Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that
you are so much heavier for me to draw up than the young king’s son--he
is with me in a moment.’ ‘Ah! you wicked child,’ cried the enchantress.
‘What do I hear you say! I thought I had separated you from all
the world, and yet you have deceived me!’ In her anger she clutched
Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand,
seized a pair of scissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut
off, and the lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless
that she took poor Rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in great
grief and misery.

On the same day that she cast out Rapunzel, however, the enchantress
fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, to the hook of the
window, and when the king’s son came and cried:

 ‘Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me.’

she let the hair down. The king’s son ascended, but instead of finding
his dearest Rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazed at him with
wicked and venomous looks. ‘Aha!’ she cried mockingly, ‘you would fetch
your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest;
the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is
lost to you; you will never see her again.’ The king’s son was beside
himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower. He
escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his
eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but
roots and berries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of
his dearest wife. Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at
length came to the desert where Rapunzel, with the twins to which she
had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness. He heard a
voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it, and
when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept. Two
of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could
see with them as before. He led her to his kingdom where he was
joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and
contented.




FUNDEVOGEL

There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt, and as
he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were
there. He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree, and at
the top of this a little child was sitting, for the mother had fallen
asleep under the tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen it in
her arms, had flown down, snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.

The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought to himself:
‘You will take him home with you, and bring him up with your Lina.’ He
took it home, therefore, and the two children grew up together. And the
one, which he had found on a tree was called Fundevogel, because a bird
had carried it away. Fundevogel and Lina loved each other so dearly that
when they did not see each other they were sad.

Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pails and
began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out
to the spring. Lina saw this and said, ‘Listen, old Sanna, why are you
fetching so much water?’ ‘If you will never repeat it to anyone, I will
tell you why.’ So Lina said, no, she would never repeat it to anyone,
and then the cook said: ‘Early tomorrow morning, when the forester
is out hunting, I will heat the water, and when it is boiling in the
kettle, I will throw in Fundevogel, and will boil him in it.’

Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, and when he
was gone the children were still in bed. Then Lina said to Fundevogel:
‘If you will never leave me, I too will never leave you.’ Fundevogel
said: ‘Neither now, nor ever will I leave you.’ Then said Lina: ‘Then
will I tell you. Last night, old Sanna carried so many buckets of water
into the house that I asked her why she was doing that, and she said
that if I would promise not to tell anyone, and she said that early
tomorrow morning when father was out hunting, she would set the kettle
full of water, throw you into it and boil you; but we will get up
quickly, dress ourselves, and go away together.’

The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, and went
away. When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook went into the
bedroom to fetch Fundevogel and throw him into it. But when she came in,
and went to the beds, both the children were gone. Then she was terribly
alarmed, and she said to herself: ‘What shall I say now when the
forester comes home and sees that the children are gone? They must be
followed instantly to get them back again.’

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children. The children, however, were sitting outside the
forest, and when they saw from afar the three servants running, Lina
said to Fundevogel: ‘Never leave me, and I will never leave you.’
Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’ Then said Lina: ‘Do you become
a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.’ When the three servants came to
the forest, nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it, but
the children were nowhere. Then said they: ‘There is nothing to be done
here,’ and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing
in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it. Then the
old cook scolded and said: ‘You simpletons, you should have cut the
rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it home with
you; go, and do it at once.’ They had therefore to go out and look for
the second time. The children, however, saw them coming from a distance.
Then Lina said: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.’ Fundevogel said: ‘Neither now; nor ever.’ Said Lina: ‘Then do you
become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in it.’ So when the three
servants came, nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in
it. They said therefore to each other: ‘What can we do here, let us go
home.’ When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them;
so they said no, they had found nothing but a church, and there was a
chandelier in it. And the cook scolded them and said: ‘You fools! why
did you not pull the church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home
with you?’ And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went with
the three servants in pursuit of the children. The children, however,
saw from afar that the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling
after them. Then said Lina: ‘Fundevogel, never leave me, and I will
never leave you.’ Then said Fundevogel: ‘Neither now, nor ever.’
Said Lina: ‘Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.’ The cook,
however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay down by it,
and was about to drink it up. But the duck swam quickly to her, seized
her head in its beak and drew her into the water, and there the old
witch had to drown. Then the children went home together, and were
heartily delighted, and if they have not died, they are living still.




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

One summer’s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the
window; he was in good spirits, and sewed with all his might. Then came
a peasant woman down the street crying: ‘Good jams, cheap! Good jams,
cheap!’ This rang pleasantly in the tailor’s ears; he stretched his
delicate head out of the window, and called: ‘Come up here, dear woman;
here you will get rid of your goods.’ The woman came up the three steps
to the tailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the pots
for him. He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it, and
at length said: ‘The jam seems to me to be good, so weigh me out four
ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no
consequence.’ The woman who had hoped to find a good sale, gave him
what he desired, but went away quite angry and grumbling. ‘Now, this jam
shall be blessed by God,’ cried the little tailor, ‘and give me health
and strength’; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard, cut himself
a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it. ‘This won’t
taste bitter,’ said he, ‘but I will just finish the jacket before I
take a bite.’ He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made
bigger and bigger stitches. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and they were
attracted and descended on it in hosts. ‘Hi! who invited you?’ said the
little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away. The flies, however,
who understood no German, would not be turned away, but came back
again in ever-increasing companies. The little tailor at last lost all
patience, and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table,
and saying: ‘Wait, and I will give it to you,’ struck it mercilessly on
them. When he drew it away and counted, there lay before him no fewer
than seven, dead and with legs stretched out. ‘Are you a fellow of that
sort?’ said he, and could not help admiring his own bravery. ‘The whole
town shall know of this!’ And the little tailor hastened to cut himself
a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered on it in large letters: ‘Seven at
one stroke!’ ‘What, the town!’ he continued, ‘the whole world shall hear
of it!’ and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb’s tail. The tailor
put on the girdle, and resolved to go forth into the world, because he
thought his workshop was too small for his valour. Before he went away,
he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could
take with him; however, he found nothing but an old cheese, and that
he put in his pocket. In front of the door he observed a bird which
had caught itself in the thicket. It had to go into his pocket with the
cheese. Now he took to the road boldly, and as he was light and nimble,
he felt no fatigue. The road led him up a mountain, and when he had
reached the highest point of it, there sat a powerful giant looking
peacefully about him. The little tailor went bravely up, spoke to him,
and said: ‘Good day, comrade, so you are sitting there overlooking the
wide-spread world! I am just on my way thither, and want to try my luck.
Have you any inclination to go with me?’ The giant looked contemptuously
at the tailor, and said: ‘You ragamuffin! You miserable creature!’

‘Oh, indeed?’ answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat, and
showed the giant the girdle, ‘there may you read what kind of a man I
am!’ The giant read: ‘Seven at one stroke,’ and thought that they had
been men whom the tailor had killed, and began to feel a little respect
for the tiny fellow. Nevertheless, he wished to try him first, and took
a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out
of it. ‘Do that likewise,’ said the giant, ‘if you have strength.’ ‘Is
that all?’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play with us!’ and put his
hand into his pocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until
the liquid ran out of it. ‘Faith,’ said he, ‘that was a little better,
wasn’t it?’ The giant did not know what to say, and could not believe it
of the little man. Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high
that the eye could scarcely follow it. ‘Now, little mite of a man, do
that likewise,’ ‘Well thrown,’ said the tailor, ‘but after all the stone
came down to earth again; I will throw you one which shall never come
back at all,’ and he put his hand into his pocket, took out the bird,
and threw it into the air. The bird, delighted with its liberty,
rose, flew away and did not come back. ‘How does that shot please you,
comrade?’ asked the tailor. ‘You can certainly throw,’ said the giant,
‘but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly.’ He
took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on
the ground, and said: ‘If you are strong enough, help me to carry the
tree out of the forest.’ ‘Readily,’ answered the little man; ‘take you
the trunk on your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs;
after all, they are the heaviest.’ The giant took the trunk on his
shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and the giant, who
could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree, and the little
tailor into the bargain: he behind, was quite merry and happy, and
whistled the song: ‘Three tailors rode forth from the gate,’ as if
carrying the tree were child’s play. The giant, after he had dragged the
heavy burden part of the way, could go no further, and cried: ‘Hark
you, I shall have to let the tree fall!’ The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it, and said
to the giant: ‘You are such a great fellow, and yet cannot even carry
the tree!’

They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giant laid
hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging, bent it
down, gave it into the tailor’s hand, and bade him eat. But the little
tailor was much too weak to hold the tree, and when the giant let it go,
it sprang back again, and the tailor was tossed into the air with it.
When he had fallen down again without injury, the giant said: ‘What is
this? Have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig?’ ‘There is no
lack of strength,’ answered the little tailor. ‘Do you think that could
be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow? I leapt over
the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.
Jump as I did, if you can do it.’ The giant made the attempt but he
could not get over the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so
that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand.

The giant said: ‘If you are such a valiant fellow, come with me into our
cavern and spend the night with us.’ The little tailor was willing, and
followed him. When they went into the cave, other giants were sitting
there by the fire, and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and
was eating it. The little tailor looked round and thought: ‘It is much
more spacious here than in my workshop.’ The giant showed him a bed, and
said he was to lie down in it and sleep. The bed, however, was too
big for the little tailor; he did not lie down in it, but crept into
a corner. When it was midnight, and the giant thought that the little
tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a great iron bar,
cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he had finished off the
grasshopper for good. With the earliest dawn the giants went into the
forest, and had quite forgotten the little tailor, when all at once he
walked up to them quite merrily and boldly. The giants were terrified,
they were afraid that he would strike them all dead, and ran away in a
great hurry.

The little tailor went onwards, always following his own pointed nose.
After he had walked for a long time, he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and as he felt weary, he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
Whilst he lay there, the people came and inspected him on all sides, and
read on his girdle: ‘Seven at one stroke.’ ‘Ah!’ said they, ‘what does
the great warrior want here in the midst of peace? He must be a mighty
lord.’ They went and announced him to the king, and gave it as their
opinion that if war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful
man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart. The counsel pleased
the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer
him military service when he awoke. The ambassador remained standing by
the sleeper, waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
and then conveyed to him this proposal. ‘For this very reason have
I come here,’ the tailor replied, ‘I am ready to enter the king’s
service.’ He was therefore honourably received, and a special dwelling
was assigned him.

The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, and wished
him a thousand miles away. ‘What is to be the end of this?’ they said
among themselves. ‘If we quarrel with him, and he strikes about him,
seven of us will fall at every blow; not one of us can stand against
him.’ They came therefore to a decision, betook themselves in a body to
the king, and begged for their dismissal. ‘We are not prepared,’ said
they, ‘to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke.’ The king was
sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants,
wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly
have been rid of him again. But he did not venture to give him his
dismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people
dead, and place himself on the royal throne. He thought about it for a
long time, and at last found good counsel. He sent to the little tailor
and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior, he had one
request to make to him. In a forest of his country lived two giants,
who caused great mischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging,
and burning, and no one could approach them without putting himself in
danger of death. If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants, he
would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of his kingdom as a
dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him.
‘That would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me!’ thought the
little tailor. ‘One is not offered a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day of one’s life!’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will soon
subdue the giants, and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen
to do it; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of
two.’

The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followed him.
When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said to his followers:
‘Just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finish off the giants.’ Then
he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left. After a
while he perceived both giants. They lay sleeping under a tree, and
snored so that the branches waved up and down. The little tailor, not
idle, gathered two pocketsful of stones, and with these climbed up the
tree. When he was halfway up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat
just above the sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on
the breast of one of the giants. For a long time the giant felt nothing,
but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said: ‘Why are you
knocking me?’ ‘You must be dreaming,’ said the other, ‘I am not knocking
you.’ They laid themselves down to sleep again, and then the tailor
threw a stone down on the second. ‘What is the meaning of this?’ cried
the other ‘Why are you pelting me?’ ‘I am not pelting you,’ answered
the first, growling. They disputed about it for a time, but as they were
weary they let the matter rest, and their eyes closed once more. The
little tailor began his game again, picked out the biggest stone, and
threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant. ‘That
is too bad!’ cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed his
companion against the tree until it shook. The other paid him back in
the same coin, and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and
belaboured each other so long, that at last they both fell down dead on
the ground at the same time. Then the little tailor leapt down. ‘It is
a lucky thing,’ said he, ‘that they did not tear up the tree on which
I was sitting, or I should have had to sprint on to another like a
squirrel; but we tailors are nimble.’ He drew out his sword and gave
each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the
horsemen and said: ‘The work is done; I have finished both of them
off, but it was hard work! They tore up trees in their sore need, and
defended themselves with them, but all that is to no purpose when a man
like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.’ ‘But are you not
wounded?’ asked the horsemen. ‘You need not concern yourself about
that,’ answered the tailor, ‘they have not bent one hair of mine.’ The
horsemen would not believe him, and rode into the forest; there they
found the giants swimming in their blood, and all round about lay the
torn-up trees.

The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward; he, however,
repented of his promise, and again bethought himself how he could get
rid of the hero. ‘Before you receive my daughter, and the half of my
kingdom,’ said he to him, ‘you must perform one more heroic deed. In
the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm, and you must catch
it first.’ ‘I fear one unicorn still less than two giants. Seven at one
blow, is my kind of affair.’ He took a rope and an axe with him, went
forth into the forest, and again bade those who were sent with him to
wait outside. He had not long to seek. The unicorn soon came towards
him, and rushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with its
horn without more ado. ‘Softly, softly; it can’t be done as quickly as
that,’ said he, and stood still and waited until the animal was quite
close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree. The unicorn ran against
the tree with all its strength, and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk
that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again, and thus it
was caught. ‘Now, I have got the bird,’ said the tailor, and came out
from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck, and then with his
axe he hewed the horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the
beast away and took it to the king.

The king still would not give him the promised reward, and made a third
demand. Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that
made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmen should give him their
help. ‘Willingly,’ said the tailor, ‘that is child’s play!’ He did not
take the huntsmen with him into the forest, and they were well pleased
that he did not, for the wild boar had several times received them in
such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him. When
the boar perceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth and
whetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but the hero
fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at
once, and in one bound out again. The boar ran after him, but the tailor
ran round outside and shut the door behind it, and then the raging
beast, which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window,
was caught. The little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they
might see the prisoner with their own eyes. The hero, however, went to
the king, who was now, whether he liked it or not, obliged to keep his
promise, and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom. Had he known
that it was no warlike hero, but a little tailor who was standing before
him, it would have gone to his heart still more than it did. The wedding
was held with great magnificence and small joy, and out of a tailor a
king was made.

After some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at
night: ‘Boy, make me the doublet, and patch the pantaloons, or else I
will rap the yard-measure over your ears.’ Then she discovered in what
state of life the young lord had been born, and next morning complained
of her wrongs to her father, and begged him to help her to get rid of
her husband, who was nothing else but a tailor. The king comforted her
and said: ‘Leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants
shall stand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bind
him, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide
world.’ The woman was satisfied with this; but the king’s armour-bearer,
who had heard all, was friendly with the young lord, and informed him of
the whole plot. ‘I’ll put a screw into that business,’ said the little
tailor. At night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time, and
when she thought that he had fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door,
and then lay down again. The little tailor, who was only pretending to
be asleep, began to cry out in a clear voice: ‘Boy, make me the doublet
and patch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure over your
ears. I smote seven at one blow. I killed two giants, I brought away one
unicorn, and caught a wild boar, and am I to fear those who are standing
outside the room.’ When these men heard the tailor speaking thus, they
were overcome by a great dread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were
behind them, and none of them would venture anything further against
him. So the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his
life.




HANSEL AND GRETEL

Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his
two children. The boy was called Hansel and the girl Gretel. He had
little to bite and to break, and once when great dearth fell on the
land, he could no longer procure even daily bread. Now when he thought
over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in his anxiety, he
groaned and said to his wife: ‘What is to become of us? How are we
to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything even for
ourselves?’ ‘I’ll tell you what, husband,’ answered the woman, ‘early
tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where
it is the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each
of them one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work and
leave them alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be
rid of them.’ ‘No, wife,’ said the man, ‘I will not do that; how can I
bear to leave my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would
soon come and tear them to pieces.’ ‘O, you fool!’ said she, ‘then we
must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane the planks for our
coffins,’ and she left him no peace until he consented. ‘But I feel very
sorry for the poor children, all the same,’ said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what their stepmother had said to their father. Gretel wept
bitter tears, and said to Hansel: ‘Now all is over with us.’ ‘Be quiet,
Gretel,’ said Hansel, ‘do not distress yourself, I will soon find a way
to help us.’ And when the old folks had fallen asleep, he got up, put
on his little coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon
shone brightly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like real silver pennies. Hansel stooped and stuffed the
little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in. Then he went
back and said to Gretel: ‘Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in
peace, God will not forsake us,’ and he lay down again in his bed. When
day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke the
two children, saying: ‘Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the
forest to fetch wood.’ She gave each a little piece of bread, and said:
‘There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then,
for you will get nothing else.’ Gretel took the bread under her apron,
as Hansel had the pebbles in his pocket. Then they all set out together
on the way to the forest. When they had walked a short time, Hansel
stood still and peeped back at the house, and did so again and again.
His father said: ‘Hansel, what are you looking at there and staying
behind for? Pay attention, and do not forget how to use your legs.’ ‘Ah,
father,’ said Hansel, ‘I am looking at my little white cat, which is
sitting up on the roof, and wants to say goodbye to me.’ The wife said:
‘Fool, that is not your little cat, that is the morning sun which is
shining on the chimneys.’ Hansel, however, had not been looking back at
the cat, but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones
out of his pocket on the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said: ‘Now,
children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not
be cold.’ Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together, as high as a
little hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning
very high, the woman said: ‘Now, children, lay yourselves down by the
fire and rest, we will go into the forest and cut some wood. When we
have done, we will come back and fetch you away.’

Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a little
piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they
believed that their father was near. It was not the axe, however, but
a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was
blowing backwards and forwards. And as they had been sitting such a long
time, their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When
at last they awoke, it was already dark night. Gretel began to cry and
said: ‘How are we to get out of the forest now?’ But Hansel comforted
her and said: ‘Just wait a little, until the moon has risen, and then we
will soon find the way.’ And when the full moon had risen, Hansel took
his little sister by the hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like
newly-coined silver pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and by break of day came once more
to their father’s house. They knocked at the door, and when the woman
opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel, she said: ‘You naughty
children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought you were
never coming back at all!’ The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut
him to the heart to leave them behind alone.

Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughout the
land, and the children heard their mother saying at night to their
father: ‘Everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left, and that
is the end. The children must go, we will take them farther into the
wood, so that they will not find their way out again; there is no other
means of saving ourselves!’ The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought:
‘It would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your
children.’ The woman, however, would listen to nothing that he had to
say, but scolded and reproached him. He who says A must say B, likewise,
and as he had yielded the first time, he had to do so a second time
also.

The children, however, were still awake and had heard the conversation.
When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up, and wanted to go
out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, but the woman had locked
the door, and Hansel could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted his
little sister, and said: ‘Do not cry, Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the
good God will help us.’

Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out of their
beds. Their piece of bread was given to them, but it was still smaller
than the time before. On the way into the forest Hansel crumbled his
in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground.
‘Hansel, why do you stop and look round?’ said the father, ‘go on.’ ‘I
am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof, and
wants to say goodbye to me,’ answered Hansel. ‘Fool!’ said the woman,
‘that is not your little pigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining
on the chimney.’ Hansel, however little by little, threw all the crumbs
on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
the mother said: ‘Just sit there, you children, and when you are tired
you may sleep a little; we are going into the forest to cut wood, and in
the evening when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.’ When
it was noon, Gretel shared her piece of bread with Hansel, who had
scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep and evening passed, but
no one came to the poor children. They did not awake until it was dark
night, and Hansel comforted his little sister and said: ‘Just wait,
Gretel, until the moon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread
which I have strewn about, they will show us our way home again.’ When
the moon came they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many
thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked
them all up. Hansel said to Gretel: ‘We shall soon find the way,’ but
they did not find it. They walked the whole night and all the next day
too from morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,
and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or three
berries, which grew on the ground. And as they were so weary that their
legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a tree and fell
asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house. They
began to walk again, but they always came deeper into the forest, and if
help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness. When it
was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough,
which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it. And
when its song was over, it spread its wings and flew away before them,
and they followed it until they reached a little house, on the roof of
which it alighted; and when they approached the little house they saw
that it was built of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows
were of clear sugar. ‘We will set to work on that,’ said Hansel, ‘and
have a good meal. I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat
some of the window, it will taste sweet.’ Hansel reached up above, and
broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretel leant
against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then a soft voice cried
from the parlour:

 ‘Nibble, nibble, gnaw,
  Who is nibbling at my little house?’

The children answered:

 ‘The wind, the wind,
  The heaven-born wind,’

and went on eating without disturbing themselves. Hansel, who liked the
taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, and Gretel pushed out
the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and enjoyed herself with
it. Suddenly the door opened, and a woman as old as the hills, who
supported herself on crutches, came creeping out. Hansel and Gretel were
so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their
hands. The old woman, however, nodded her head, and said: ‘Oh, you dear
children, who has brought you here? do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you.’ She took them both by the hand, and led them
into her little house. Then good food was set before them, milk and
pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts. Afterwards two pretty little
beds were covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay down
in them, and thought they were in heaven.

The old woman had only pretended to be so kind; she was in reality
a wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built the
little house of bread in order to entice them there. When a child fell
into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and that was a feast
day with her. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but they have
a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware when human beings draw near.
When Hansel and Gretel came into her neighbourhood, she laughed with
malice, and said mockingly: ‘I have them, they shall not escape me
again!’ Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was
already up, and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so
pretty, with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself: ‘That
will be a dainty mouthful!’ Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled
hand, carried him into a little stable, and locked him in behind a
grated door. Scream as he might, it would not help him. Then she went to
Gretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried: ‘Get up, lazy thing, fetch
some water, and cook something good for your brother, he is in the
stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I will eat him.’
Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all in vain, for she was
forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretel got nothing
but crab-shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little stable, and
cried: ‘Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if you will soon
be fat.’ Hansel, however, stretched out a little bone to her, and
the old woman, who had dim eyes, could not see it, and thought it was
Hansel’s finger, and was astonished that there was no way of fattening
him. When four weeks had gone by, and Hansel still remained thin, she
was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer. ‘Now, then,
Gretel,’ she cried to the girl, ‘stir yourself, and bring some water.
Let Hansel be fat or lean, tomorrow I will kill him, and cook him.’ Ah,
how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water,
and how her tears did flow down her cheeks! ‘Dear God, do help us,’ she
cried. ‘If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, we should
at any rate have died together.’ ‘Just keep your noise to yourself,’
said the old woman, ‘it won’t help you at all.’

Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with
the water, and light the fire. ‘We will bake first,’ said the old woman,
‘I have already heated the oven, and kneaded the dough.’ She pushed poor
Gretel out to the oven, from which flames of fire were already darting.
‘Creep in,’ said the witch, ‘and see if it is properly heated, so that
we can put the bread in.’ And once Gretel was inside, she intended to
shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.
But Gretel saw what she had in mind, and said: ‘I do not know how I am
to do it; how do I get in?’ ‘Silly goose,’ said the old woman. ‘The door
is big enough; just look, I can get in myself!’ and she crept up and
thrust her head into the oven. Then Gretel gave her a push that drove
her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened the bolt. Oh! then
she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ran away and the godless
witch was miserably burnt to death.

Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his little stable,
and cried: ‘Hansel, we are saved! The old witch is dead!’ Then Hansel
sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened. How they did
rejoice and embrace each other, and dance about and kiss each other! And
as they had no longer any need to fear her, they went into the witch’s
house, and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels.
‘These are far better than pebbles!’ said Hansel, and thrust into his
pockets whatever could be got in, and Gretel said: ‘I, too, will take
something home with me,’ and filled her pinafore full. ‘But now we must
be off,’ said Hansel, ‘that we may get out of the witch’s forest.’

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great stretch of
water. ‘We cannot cross,’ said Hansel, ‘I see no foot-plank, and no
bridge.’ ‘And there is also no ferry,’ answered Gretel, ‘but a white
duck is swimming there: if I ask her, she will help us over.’ Then she
cried:

 ‘Little duck, little duck, dost thou see,
  Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee?
  There’s never a plank, or bridge in sight,
  Take us across on thy back so white.’

The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back, and told
his sister to sit by him. ‘No,’ replied Gretel, ‘that will be too heavy
for the little duck; she shall take us across, one after the other.’ The
good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and had
walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more familiar
to them, and at length they saw from afar their father’s house. Then
they began to run, rushed into the parlour, and threw themselves round
their father’s neck. The man had not known one happy hour since he had
left the children in the forest; the woman, however, was dead. Gretel
emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the
room, and Hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to
add to them. Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together
in perfect happiness. My tale is done, there runs a mouse; whosoever
catches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.




THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE

Once upon a time, a mouse, a bird, and a sausage, entered into
partnership and set up house together. For a long time all went well;
they lived in great comfort, and prospered so far as to be able to add
considerably to their stores. The bird’s duty was to fly daily into the
wood and bring in fuel; the mouse fetched the water, and the sausage saw
to the cooking.

When people are too well off they always begin to long for something
new. And so it came to pass, that the bird, while out one day, met a
fellow bird, to whom he boastfully expatiated on the excellence of his
household arrangements. But the other bird sneered at him for being a
poor simpleton, who did all the hard work, while the other two stayed
at home and had a good time of it. For, when the mouse had made the fire
and fetched in the water, she could retire into her little room and rest
until it was time to set the table. The sausage had only to watch the
pot to see that the food was properly cooked, and when it was near
dinner-time, he just threw himself into the broth, or rolled in and out
among the vegetables three or four times, and there they were, buttered,
and salted, and ready to be served. Then, when the bird came home and
had laid aside his burden, they sat down to table, and when they had
finished their meal, they could sleep their fill till the following
morning: and that was really a very delightful life.

Influenced by those remarks, the bird next morning refused to bring in
the wood, telling the others that he had been their servant long enough,
and had been a fool into the bargain, and that it was now time to make a
change, and to try some other way of arranging the work. Beg and pray
as the mouse and the sausage might, it was of no use; the bird remained
master of the situation, and the venture had to be made. They therefore
drew lots, and it fell to the sausage to bring in the wood, to the mouse
to cook, and to the bird to fetch the water.

And now what happened? The sausage started in search of wood, the bird
made the fire, and the mouse put on the pot, and then these two waited
till the sausage returned with the fuel for the following day. But the
sausage remained so long away, that they became uneasy, and the bird
flew out to meet him. He had not flown far, however, when he came across
a dog who, having met the sausage, had regarded him as his legitimate
booty, and so seized and swallowed him. The bird complained to the dog
of this bare-faced robbery, but nothing he said was of any avail, for
the dog answered that he found false credentials on the sausage, and
that was the reason his life had been forfeited.

He picked up the wood, and flew sadly home, and told the mouse all he
had seen and heard. They were both very unhappy, but agreed to make the
best of things and to remain with one another.

So now the bird set the table, and the mouse looked after the food and,
wishing to prepare it in the same way as the sausage, by rolling in and
out among the vegetables to salt and butter them, she jumped into the
pot; but she stopped short long before she reached the bottom, having
already parted not only with her skin and hair, but also with life.

Presently the bird came in and wanted to serve up the dinner, but he
could nowhere see the cook. In his alarm and flurry, he threw the wood
here and there about the floor, called and searched, but no cook was to
be found. Then some of the wood that had been carelessly thrown down,
caught fire and began to blaze. The bird hastened to fetch some water,
but his pail fell into the well, and he after it, and as he was unable
to recover himself, he was drowned.




MOTHER HOLLE

Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters; one of them
was beautiful and industrious, the other ugly and lazy. The mother,
however, loved the ugly and lazy one best, because she was her own
daughter, and so the other, who was only her stepdaughter, was made
to do all the work of the house, and was quite the Cinderella of the
family. Her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in
the high road, there to spin until she made her fingers bleed. Now it
chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle, and as the girl
stopped over the well to wash it off, the spindle suddenly sprang out
of her hand and fell into the well. She ran home crying to tell of her
misfortune, but her stepmother spoke harshly to her, and after giving
her a violent scolding, said unkindly, ‘As you have let the spindle fall
into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out.’

The girl went back to the well not knowing what to do, and at last in
her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle.

She remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a
beautiful meadow, full of sunshine, and with countless flowers blooming
in every direction.

She walked over the meadow, and presently she came upon a baker’s oven
full of bread, and the loaves cried out to her, ‘Take us out, take us
out, or alas! we shall be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long
ago.’ So she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out.

She went on a little farther, till she came to a tree full of apples.
‘Shake me, shake me, I pray,’ cried the tree; ‘my apples, one and all,
are ripe.’ So she shook the tree, and the apples came falling down upon
her like rain; but she continued shaking until there was not a single
apple left upon it. Then she carefully gathered the apples together in a
heap and walked on again.

The next thing she came to was a little house, and there she saw an old
woman looking out, with such large teeth, that she was terrified, and
turned to run away. But the old woman called after her, ‘What are you
afraid of, dear child? Stay with me; if you will do the work of my house
properly for me, I will make you very happy. You must be very careful,
however, to make my bed in the right way, for I wish you always to shake
it thoroughly, so that the feathers fly about; then they say, down there
in the world, that it is snowing; for I am Mother Holle.’ The old woman
spoke so kindly, that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter
into her service.

She took care to do everything according to the old woman’s bidding and
every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might, so that the
feathers flew about like so many snowflakes. The old woman was as good
as her word: she never spoke angrily to her, and gave her roast and
boiled meats every day.

So she stayed on with Mother Holle for some time, and then she began
to grow unhappy. She could not at first tell why she felt sad, but she
became conscious at last of great longing to go home; then she knew she
was homesick, although she was a thousand times better off with Mother
Holle than with her mother and sister. After waiting awhile, she went
to Mother Holle and said, ‘I am so homesick, that I cannot stay with
you any longer, for although I am so happy here, I must return to my own
people.’

Then Mother Holle said, ‘I am pleased that you should want to go back
to your own people, and as you have served me so well and faithfully, I
will take you home myself.’

Thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway. The gate
was opened, and as the girl passed through, a shower of gold fell upon
her, and the gold clung to her, so that she was covered with it from
head to foot.

‘That is a reward for your industry,’ said Mother Holle, and as she
spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well.

The gate was then closed, and the girl found herself back in the old
world close to her mother’s house. As she entered the courtyard, the
cock who was perched on the well, called out:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your golden daughter’s come back to you.’

Then she went in to her mother and sister, and as she was so richly
covered with gold, they gave her a warm welcome. She related to them
all that had happened, and when the mother heard how she had come by her
great riches, she thought she should like her ugly, lazy daughter to go
and try her fortune. So she made the sister go and sit by the well
and spin, and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a
thorn-bush, so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle; then
she threw it into the well, and jumped in herself.

Like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow, and walked over it
till she came to the oven. ‘Take us out, take us out, or alas! we shall
be burnt to a cinder; we were baked through long ago,’ cried the loaves
as before. But the lazy girl answered, ‘Do you think I am going to dirty
my hands for you?’ and walked on.

Presently she came to the apple-tree. ‘Shake me, shake me, I pray; my
apples, one and all, are ripe,’ it cried. But she only answered, ‘A nice
thing to ask me to do, one of the apples might fall on my head,’ and
passed on.

At last she came to Mother Holle’s house, and as she had heard all about
the large teeth from her sister, she was not afraid of them, and engaged
herself without delay to the old woman.

The first day she was very obedient and industrious, and exerted herself
to please Mother Holle, for she thought of the gold she should get in
return. The next day, however, she began to dawdle over her work, and
the third day she was more idle still; then she began to lie in bed in
the mornings and refused to get up. Worse still, she neglected to
make the old woman’s bed properly, and forgot to shake it so that the
feathers might fly about. So Mother Holle very soon got tired of her,
and told her she might go. The lazy girl was delighted at this, and
thought to herself, ‘The gold will soon be mine.’ Mother Holle led her,
as she had led her sister, to the broad gateway; but as she was passing
through, instead of the shower of gold, a great bucketful of pitch came
pouring over her.

‘That is in return for your services,’ said the old woman, and she shut
the gate.

So the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch, and the cock on the
well called out as she saw her:

 ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!
  Your dirty daughter’s come back to you.’

But, try what she would, she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to
her as long as she lived.




LITTLE RED-CAP [LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD]

Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone
who looked at her, but most of all by her grandmother, and there was
nothing that she would not have given to the child. Once she gave her a
little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well that she would never
wear anything else; so she was always called ‘Little Red-Cap.’

One day her mother said to her: ‘Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine; take them to your grandmother, she is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot, and
when you are going, walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path,
or you may fall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother will
get nothing; and when you go into her room, don’t forget to say, “Good
morning”, and don’t peep into every corner before you do it.’

‘I will take great care,’ said Little Red-Cap to her mother, and gave
her hand on it.

The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from the village,
and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a wolf met her. Red-Cap
did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all afraid of
him.

‘Good day, Little Red-Cap,’ said he.

‘Thank you kindly, wolf.’

‘Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?’

‘To my grandmother’s.’

‘What have you got in your apron?’

‘Cake and wine; yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick grandmother is to
have something good, to make her stronger.’

‘Where does your grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?’

‘A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood; her house stands
under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are just below; you
surely must know it,’ replied Little Red-Cap.

The wolf thought to himself: ‘What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.’ So he walked for a short time by
the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he said: ‘See, Little Red-Cap, how
pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round? I believe,
too, that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing; you
walk gravely along as if you were going to school, while everything else
out here in the wood is merry.’

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams dancing
here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing everywhere,
she thought: ‘Suppose I take grandmother a fresh nosegay; that would
please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still get there
in good time’; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for
flowers. And whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a
still prettier one farther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and
deeper into the wood.

Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

‘Who is there?’

‘Little Red-Cap,’ replied the wolf. ‘She is bringing cake and wine; open
the door.’

‘Lift the latch,’ called out the grandmother, ‘I am too weak, and cannot
get up.’

The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,
and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she
remembered her grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, and when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling that she said to
herself: ‘Oh dear! how uneasy I feel today, and at other times I like
being with grandmother so much.’ She called out: ‘Good morning,’ but
received no answer; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains.
There lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face, and
looking very strange.

‘Oh! grandmother,’ she said, ‘what big ears you have!’

‘The better to hear you with, my child,’ was the reply.

‘But, grandmother, what big eyes you have!’ she said.

‘The better to see you with, my dear.’

‘But, grandmother, what large hands you have!’

‘The better to hug you with.’

‘Oh! but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!’

‘The better to eat you with!’

And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he was out of
bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself: ‘How the old woman is snoring! I must
just see if she wants anything.’ So he went into the room, and when he
came to the bed, he saw that the wolf was lying in it. ‘Do I find you
here, you old sinner!’ said he. ‘I have long sought you!’ Then just as
he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might have
devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, so he did
not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cut open the stomach
of the sleeping wolf. When he had made two snips, he saw the little
Red-Cap shining, and then he made two snips more, and the little girl
sprang out, crying: ‘Ah, how frightened I have been! How dark it was
inside the wolf’; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive
also, but scarcely able to breathe. Red-Cap, however, quickly fetched
great stones with which they filled the wolf’s belly, and when he awoke,
he wanted to run away, but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at
once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the wolf’s skin and
went home with it; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which
Red-Cap had brought, and revived, but Red-Cap thought to herself: ‘As
long as I live, I will never by myself leave the path, to run into the
wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do so.’




It also related that once when Red-Cap was again taking cakes to the old
grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried to entice her from the
path. Red-Cap, however, was on her guard, and went straight forward on
her way, and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf, and that he
had said ‘good morning’ to her, but with such a wicked look in his eyes,
that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would
have eaten her up. ‘Well,’ said the grandmother, ‘we will shut the door,
that he may not come in.’ Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried:
‘Open the door, grandmother, I am Little Red-Cap, and am bringing you
some cakes.’ But they did not speak, or open the door, so the grey-beard
stole twice or thrice round the house, and at last jumped on the roof,
intending to wait until Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then to
steal after her and devour her in the darkness. But the grandmother
saw what was in his thoughts. In front of the house was a great stone
trough, so she said to the child: ‘Take the pail, Red-Cap; I made some
sausages yesterday, so carry the water in which I boiled them to the
trough.’ Red-Cap carried until the great trough was quite full. Then the
smell of the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peeped down,
and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep
his footing and began to slip, and slipped down from the roof straight
into the great trough, and was drowned. But Red-Cap went joyously home,
and no one ever did anything to harm her again.




THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM

There was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter, and as she was
grown up, he was anxious that she should be well married and provided
for. He said to himself, ‘I will give her to the first suitable man who
comes and asks for her hand.’ Not long after a suitor appeared, and as
he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with
which to find fault, he betrothed his daughter to him. But the girl did
not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband.
She did not feel that she could trust him, and she could not look at him
nor think of him without an inward shudder. One day he said to her, ‘You
have not yet paid me a visit, although we have been betrothed for some
time.’ ‘I do not know where your house is,’ she answered. ‘My house is
out there in the dark forest,’ he said. She tried to excuse herself by
saying that she would not be able to find the way thither. Her betrothed
only replied, ‘You must come and see me next Sunday; I have already
invited guests for that day, and that you may not mistake the way, I
will strew ashes along the path.’

When Sunday came, and it was time for the girl to start, a feeling of
dread came over her which she could not explain, and that she might
be able to find her path again, she filled her pockets with peas and
lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along. On reaching the
entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes, and these
she followed, throwing down some peas on either side of her at every
step she took. She walked the whole day until she came to the deepest,
darkest part of the forest. There she saw a lonely house, looking so
grim and mysterious, that it did not please her at all. She stepped
inside, but not a soul was to be seen, and a great silence reigned
throughout. Suddenly a voice cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a
cage on the wall. Again it cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

The girl passed on, going from room to room of the house, but they were
all empty, and still she saw no one. At last she came to the cellar,
and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her head from
shaking. ‘Can you tell me,’ asked the girl, ‘if my betrothed husband
lives here?’

‘Ah, you poor child,’ answered the old woman, ‘what a place for you to
come to! This is a murderers’ den. You think yourself a promised bride,
and that your marriage will soon take place, but it is with death that
you will keep your marriage feast. Look, do you see that large cauldron
of water which I am obliged to keep on the fire! As soon as they have
you in their power they will kill you without mercy, and cook and eat
you, for they are eaters of men. If I did not take pity on you and save
you, you would be lost.’

Thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask, which quite hid her
from view. ‘Keep as still as a mouse,’ she said; ‘do not move or speak,
or it will be all over with you. Tonight, when the robbers are
all asleep, we will flee together. I have long been waiting for an
opportunity to escape.’

The words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned,
dragging another young girl along with them. They were all drunk, and
paid no heed to her cries and lamentations. They gave her wine to drink,
three glasses full, one of white wine, one of red, and one of yellow,
and with that her heart gave way and she died. Then they tore off her
dainty clothing, laid her on a table, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces, and sprinkled salt upon it.

The poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the
cask, for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by
the robbers. One of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on
the little finger of the murdered girl, and as he could not draw it off
easily, he took a hatchet and cut off the finger; but the finger sprang
into the air, and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was
hiding there. The robber took a light and began looking for it, but he
could not find it. ‘Have you looked behind the large cask?’ said one of
the others. But the old woman called out, ‘Come and eat your suppers,
and let the thing be till tomorrow; the finger won’t run away.’

‘The old woman is right,’ said the robbers, and they ceased looking for
the finger and sat down.

The old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine, and before
long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar, fast asleep and
snoring. As soon as the girl was assured of this, she came from behind
the cask. She was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers, who
were lying close together, and every moment she was filled with renewed
dread lest she should awaken them. But God helped her, so that she
passed safely over them, and then she and the old woman went upstairs,
opened the door, and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers’
den. They found the ashes scattered by the wind, but the peas and
lentils had sprouted, and grown sufficiently above the ground, to guide
them in the moonlight along the path. All night long they walked, and it
was morning before they reached the mill. Then the girl told her father
all that had happened.

The day came that had been fixed for the marriage. The bridegroom
arrived and also a large company of guests, for the miller had taken
care to invite all his friends and relations. As they sat at the feast,
each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale; the bride sat still and did
not say a word.

‘And you, my love,’ said the bridegroom, turning to her, ‘is there no
tale you know? Tell us something.’

‘I will tell you a dream, then,’ said the bride. ‘I went alone through a
forest and came at last to a house; not a soul could I find within, but
a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried:

 ‘Turn back, turn back, young maiden fair,
  Linger not in this murderers’ lair.’

and again a second time it said these words.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘I went on through the house from room to room, but they were all empty,
and everything was so grim and mysterious. At last I went down to the
cellar, and there sat a very, very old woman, who could not keep her
head still. I asked her if my betrothed lived here, and she answered,
“Ah, you poor child, you are come to a murderers’ den; your betrothed
does indeed live here, but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards
cook and eat you.”’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘The old woman hid me behind a large cask, and scarcely had she done
this when the robbers returned home, dragging a young girl along with
them. They gave her three kinds of wine to drink, white, red, and
yellow, and with that she died.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘Then they tore off her dainty clothing, and cut her beautiful body into
pieces and sprinkled salt upon it.’

‘My darling, this is only a dream.’

‘And one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her
finger, and as it was difficult to draw off, he took a hatchet and cut
off her finger; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the
great cask into my lap. And here is the finger with the ring.’ And
with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the
assembled guests.

The bridegroom, who during this recital had grown deadly pale, up and
tried to escape, but the guests seized him and held him fast. They
delivered him up to justice, and he and all his murderous band were
condemned to death for their wicked deeds.




TOM THUMB

A poor woodman sat in his cottage one night, smoking his pipe by the
fireside, while his wife sat by his side spinning. ‘How lonely it is,
wife,’ said he, as he puffed out a long curl of smoke, ‘for you and me
to sit here by ourselves, without any children to play about and amuse
us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children!’
‘What you say is very true,’ said the wife, sighing, and turning round
her wheel; ‘how happy should I be if I had but one child! If it were
ever so small--nay, if it were no bigger than my thumb--I should be very
happy, and love it dearly.’ Now--odd as you may think it--it came to
pass that this good woman’s wish was fulfilled, just in the very way she
had wished it; for, not long afterwards, she had a little boy, who was
quite healthy and strong, but was not much bigger than my thumb. So
they said, ‘Well, we cannot say we have not got what we wished for, and,
little as he is, we will love him dearly.’ And they called him Thomas
Thumb.

They gave him plenty of food, yet for all they could do he never grew
bigger, but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born.
Still, his eyes were sharp and sparkling, and he soon showed himself to
be a clever little fellow, who always knew well what he was about.

One day, as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut
fuel, he said, ‘I wish I had someone to bring the cart after me, for I
want to make haste.’ ‘Oh, father,’ cried Tom, ‘I will take care of that;
the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it.’ Then the woodman
laughed, and said, ‘How can that be? you cannot reach up to the horse’s
bridle.’ ‘Never mind that, father,’ said Tom; ‘if my mother will only
harness the horse, I will get into his ear and tell him which way to
go.’ ‘Well,’ said the father, ‘we will try for once.’

When the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart, and put
Tom into his ear; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how
to go, crying out, ‘Go on!’ and ‘Stop!’ as he wanted: and thus the horse
went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the
wood. It happened that as the horse was going a little too fast, and Tom
was calling out, ‘Gently! gently!’ two strangers came up. ‘What an odd
thing that is!’ said one: ‘there is a cart going along, and I hear a
carter talking to the horse, but yet I can see no one.’ ‘That is queer,
indeed,’ said the other; ‘let us follow the cart, and see where it
goes.’ So they went on into the wood, till at last they came to the
place where the woodman was. Then Tom Thumb, seeing his father, cried
out, ‘See, father, here I am with the cart, all right and safe! now take
me down!’ So his father took hold of the horse with one hand, and with
the other took his son out of the horse’s ear, and put him down upon a
straw, where he sat as merry as you please.

The two strangers were all this time looking on, and did not know what
to say for wonder. At last one took the other aside, and said, ‘That
little urchin will make our fortune, if we can get him, and carry him
about from town to town as a show; we must buy him.’ So they went up to
the woodman, and asked him what he would take for the little man. ‘He
will be better off,’ said they, ‘with us than with you.’ ‘I won’t sell
him at all,’ said the father; ‘my own flesh and blood is dearer to me
than all the silver and gold in the world.’ But Tom, hearing of the
bargain they wanted to make, crept up his father’s coat to his shoulder
and whispered in his ear, ‘Take the money, father, and let them have me;
I’ll soon come back to you.’

So the woodman at last said he would sell Tom to the strangers for a
large piece of gold, and they paid the price. ‘Where would you like to
sit?’ said one of them. ‘Oh, put me on the rim of your hat; that will be
a nice gallery for me; I can walk about there and see the country as we
go along.’ So they did as he wished; and when Tom had taken leave of his
father they took him away with them.

They journeyed on till it began to be dusky, and then the little man
said, ‘Let me get down, I’m tired.’ So the man took off his hat, and
put him down on a clod of earth, in a ploughed field by the side of the
road. But Tom ran about amongst the furrows, and at last slipped into
an old mouse-hole. ‘Good night, my masters!’ said he, ‘I’m off! mind and
look sharp after me the next time.’ Then they ran at once to the place,
and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole, but all in vain;
Tom only crawled farther and farther in; and at last it became quite
dark, so that they were forced to go their way without their prize, as
sulky as could be.

When Tom found they were gone, he came out of his hiding-place. ‘What
dangerous walking it is,’ said he, ‘in this ploughed field! If I were to
fall from one of these great clods, I should undoubtedly break my neck.’
At last, by good luck, he found a large empty snail-shell. ‘This is
lucky,’ said he, ‘I can sleep here very well’; and in he crept.

Just as he was falling asleep, he heard two men passing by, chatting
together; and one said to the other, ‘How can we rob that rich parson’s
house of his silver and gold?’ ‘I’ll tell you!’ cried Tom. ‘What noise
was that?’ said the thief, frightened; ‘I’m sure I heard someone speak.’
They stood still listening, and Tom said, ‘Take me with you, and I’ll
soon show you how to get the parson’s money.’ ‘But where are you?’ said
they. ‘Look about on the ground,’ answered he, ‘and listen where the
sound comes from.’ At last the thieves found him out, and lifted him
up in their hands. ‘You little urchin!’ they said, ‘what can you do for
us?’ ‘Why, I can get between the iron window-bars of the parson’s house,
and throw you out whatever you want.’ ‘That’s a good thought,’ said the
thieves; ‘come along, we shall see what you can do.’

When they came to the parson’s house, Tom slipped through the
window-bars into the room, and then called out as loud as he could bawl,
‘Will you have all that is here?’ At this the thieves were frightened,
and said, ‘Softly, softly! Speak low, that you may not awaken anybody.’
But Tom seemed as if he did not understand them, and bawled out again,
‘How much will you have? Shall I throw it all out?’ Now the cook lay in
the next room; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and
listened. Meantime the thieves were frightened, and ran off a little
way; but at last they plucked up their hearts, and said, ‘The little
urchin is only trying to make fools of us.’ So they came back and
whispered softly to him, saying, ‘Now let us have no more of your
roguish jokes; but throw us out some of the money.’ Then Tom called out
as loud as he could, ‘Very well! hold your hands! here it comes.’

The cook heard this quite plain, so she sprang out of bed, and ran to
open the door. The thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails: and
the maid, having groped about and found nothing, went away for a light.
By the time she came back, Tom had slipped off into the barn; and when
she had looked about and searched every hole and corner, and found
nobody, she went to bed, thinking she must have been dreaming with her
eyes open.

The little man crawled about in the hay-loft, and at last found a snug
place to finish his night’s rest in; so he laid himself down, meaning
to sleep till daylight, and then find his way home to his father and
mother. But alas! how woefully he was undone! what crosses and sorrows
happen to us all in this world! The cook got up early, before daybreak,
to feed the cows; and going straight to the hay-loft, carried away
a large bundle of hay, with the little man in the middle of it, fast
asleep. He still, however, slept on, and did not awake till he found
himself in the mouth of the cow; for the cook had put the hay into the
cow’s rick, and the cow had taken Tom up in a mouthful of it. ‘Good
lack-a-day!’ said he, ‘how came I to tumble into the mill?’ But he soon
found out where he really was; and was forced to have all his wits about
him, that he might not get between the cow’s teeth, and so be crushed to
death. At last down he went into her stomach. ‘It is rather dark,’ said
he; ‘they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in; a
candle would be no bad thing.’

Though he made the best of his bad luck, he did not like his quarters at
all; and the worst of it was, that more and more hay was always coming
down, and the space left for him became smaller and smaller. At last he
cried out as loud as he could, ‘Don’t bring me any more hay! Don’t bring
me any more hay!’

The maid happened to be just then milking the cow; and hearing someone
speak, but seeing nobody, and yet being quite sure it was the same voice
that she had heard in the night, she was so frightened that she fell off
her stool, and overset the milk-pail. As soon as she could pick herself
up out of the dirt, she ran off as fast as she could to her master the
parson, and said, ‘Sir, sir, the cow is talking!’ But the parson
said, ‘Woman, thou art surely mad!’ However, he went with her into the
cow-house, to try and see what was the matter.

Scarcely had they set foot on the threshold, when Tom called out, ‘Don’t
bring me any more hay!’ Then the parson himself was frightened; and
thinking the cow was surely bewitched, told his man to kill her on the
spot. So the cow was killed, and cut up; and the stomach, in which Tom
lay, was thrown out upon a dunghill.

Tom soon set himself to work to get out, which was not a very easy
task; but at last, just as he had made room to get his head out, fresh
ill-luck befell him. A hungry wolf sprang out, and swallowed up the
whole stomach, with Tom in it, at one gulp, and ran away.

Tom, however, was still not disheartened; and thinking the wolf would
not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along, he called
out, ‘My good friend, I can show you a famous treat.’ ‘Where’s that?’
said the wolf. ‘In such and such a house,’ said Tom, describing his own
father’s house. ‘You can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and
then into the pantry, and there you will find cakes, ham, beef, cold
chicken, roast pig, apple-dumplings, and everything that your heart can
wish.’

The wolf did not want to be asked twice; so that very night he went to
the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen, and then into
the pantry, and ate and drank there to his heart’s content. As soon as
he had had enough he wanted to get away; but he had eaten so much that
he could not go out by the same way he came in.

This was just what Tom had reckoned upon; and now he began to set up a
great shout, making all the noise he could. ‘Will you be easy?’ said the
wolf; ‘you’ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter.’
‘What’s that to me?’ said the little man; ‘you have had your frolic, now
I’ve a mind to be merry myself’; and he began, singing and shouting as
loud as he could.

The woodman and his wife, being awakened by the noise, peeped through
a crack in the door; but when they saw a wolf was there, you may well
suppose that they were sadly frightened; and the woodman ran for his
axe, and gave his wife a scythe. ‘Do you stay behind,’ said the woodman,
‘and when I have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the
scythe.’ Tom heard all this, and cried out, ‘Father, father! I am here,
the wolf has swallowed me.’ And his father said, ‘Heaven be praised! we
have found our dear child again’; and he told his wife not to use the
scythe for fear she should hurt him. Then he aimed a great blow, and
struck the wolf on the head, and killed him on the spot! and when he was
dead they cut open his body, and set Tommy free. ‘Ah!’ said the father,
‘what fears we have had for you!’ ‘Yes, father,’ answered he; ‘I have
travelled all over the world, I think, in one way or other, since we
parted; and now I am very glad to come home and get fresh air again.’
‘Why, where have you been?’ said his father. ‘I have been in a
mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow’s throat--and in the
wolf’s belly; and yet here I am again, safe and sound.’

‘Well,’ said they, ‘you are come back, and we will not sell you again
for all the riches in the world.’

Then they hugged and kissed their dear little son, and gave him plenty
to eat and drink, for he was very hungry; and then they fetched new
clothes for him, for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey.
So Master Thumb stayed at home with his father and mother, in peace; for
though he had been so great a traveller, and had done and seen so many
fine things, and was fond enough of telling the whole story, he always
agreed that, after all, there’s no place like HOME!




RUMPELSTILTSKIN

By the side of a wood, in a country a long way off, ran a fine stream
of water; and upon the stream there stood a mill. The miller’s house was
close by, and the miller, you must know, had a very beautiful daughter.
She was, moreover, very shrewd and clever; and the miller was so proud
of her, that he one day told the king of the land, who used to come and
hunt in the wood, that his daughter could spin gold out of straw. Now
this king was very fond of money; and when he heard the miller’s boast
his greediness was raised, and he sent for the girl to be brought before
him. Then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great
heap of straw, and gave her a spinning-wheel, and said, ‘All this must
be spun into gold before morning, as you love your life.’ It was in vain
that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father,
for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold: the chamber
door was locked, and she was left alone.

She sat down in one corner of the room, and began to bewail her hard
fate; when on a sudden the door opened, and a droll-looking little man
hobbled in, and said, ‘Good morrow to you, my good lass; what are you
weeping for?’ ‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I must spin this straw into gold, and
I know not how.’ ‘What will you give me,’ said the hobgoblin, ‘to do it
for you?’ ‘My necklace,’ replied the maiden. He took her at her word,
and sat himself down to the wheel, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

And round about the wheel went merrily; the work was quickly done, and
the straw was all spun into gold.

When the king came and saw this, he was greatly astonished and pleased;
but his heart grew still more greedy of gain, and he shut up the poor
miller’s daughter again with a fresh task. Then she knew not what to do,
and sat down once more to weep; but the dwarf soon opened the door, and
said, ‘What will you give me to do your task?’ ‘The ring on my finger,’
said she. So her little friend took the ring, and began to work at the
wheel again, and whistled and sang:

 ‘Round about, round about,
    Lo and behold!
  Reel away, reel away,
    Straw into gold!’

till, long before morning, all was done again.

The king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure;
but still he had not enough: so he took the miller’s daughter to a yet
larger heap, and said, ‘All this must be spun tonight; and if it is,
you shall be my queen.’ As soon as she was alone that dwarf came in, and
said, ‘What will you give me to spin gold for you this third time?’
‘I have nothing left,’ said she. ‘Then say you will give me,’ said
the little man, ‘the first little child that you may have when you are
queen.’ ‘That may never be,’ thought the miller’s daughter: and as she
knew no other way to get her task done, she said she would do what he
asked. Round went the wheel again to the old song, and the manikin once
more spun the heap into gold. The king came in the morning, and, finding
all he wanted, was forced to keep his word; so he married the miller’s
daughter, and she really became queen.

At the birth of her first little child she was very glad, and forgot the
dwarf, and what she had said. But one day he came into her room, where
she was sitting playing with her baby, and put her in mind of it. Then
she grieved sorely at her misfortune, and said she would give him all
the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off, but in vain; till at
last her tears softened him, and he said, ‘I will give you three days’
grace, and if during that time you tell me my name, you shall keep your
child.’

Now the queen lay awake all night, thinking of all the odd names that
she had ever heard; and she sent messengers all over the land to find
out new ones. The next day the little man came, and she began with
TIMOTHY, ICHABOD, BENJAMIN, JEREMIAH, and all the names she could
remember; but to all and each of them he said, ‘Madam, that is not my
name.’

The second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of,
BANDY-LEGS, HUNCHBACK, CROOK-SHANKS, and so on; but the little gentleman
still said to every one of them, ‘Madam, that is not my name.’

The third day one of the messengers came back, and said, ‘I have
travelled two days without hearing of any other names; but yesterday, as
I was climbing a high hill, among the trees of the forest where the fox
and the hare bid each other good night, I saw a little hut; and before
the hut burnt a fire; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was
dancing upon one leg, and singing:

 “Merrily the feast I’ll make.
  Today I’ll brew, tomorrow bake;
  Merrily I’ll dance and sing,
  For next day will a stranger bring.
  Little does my lady dream
  Rumpelstiltskin is my name!”

When the queen heard this she jumped for joy, and as soon as her little
friend came she sat down upon her throne, and called all her court round
to enjoy the fun; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her
arms, as if it was quite ready to be given up. Then the little man began
to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child, to take home with
him to his hut in the woods; and he cried out, ‘Now, lady, what is my
name?’ ‘Is it JOHN?’ asked she. ‘No, madam!’ ‘Is it TOM?’ ‘No, madam!’
‘Is it JEMMY?’ ‘It is not.’ ‘Can your name be RUMPELSTILTSKIN?’ said the
lady slyly. ‘Some witch told you that!--some witch told you that!’ cried
the little man, and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the
floor, that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it
out.

Then he made the best of his way off, while the nurse laughed and the
baby crowed; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much
trouble for nothing, and said, ‘We wish you a very good morning, and a
merry feast, Mr RUMPLESTILTSKIN!’




CLEVER GRETEL

There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes with red heels, and
when she walked out with them on, she turned herself this way and that,
was quite happy and thought: ‘You certainly are a pretty girl!’ And when
she came home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught of wine,
and as wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatever she
was cooking until she was satisfied, and said: ‘The cook must know what
the food is like.’

It came to pass that the master one day said to her: ‘Gretel, there is a
guest coming this evening; prepare me two fowls very daintily.’ ‘I will
see to it, master,’ answered Gretel. She killed two fowls, scalded them,
plucked them, put them on the spit, and towards evening set them before
the fire, that they might roast. The fowls began to turn brown, and were
nearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived. Then Gretel called out
to her master: ‘If the guest does not come, I must take the fowls away
from the fire, but it will be a sin and a shame if they are not eaten
the moment they are at their juiciest.’ The master said: ‘I will run
myself, and fetch the guest.’ When the master had turned his back,
Gretel laid the spit with the fowls on one side, and thought: ‘Standing
so long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty; who knows
when they will come? Meanwhile, I will run into the cellar, and take a
drink.’ She ran down, set a jug, said: ‘God bless it for you, Gretel,’
and took a good drink, and thought that wine should flow on, and should
not be interrupted, and took yet another hearty draught.

Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, basted them,
and drove the spit merrily round. But as the roast meat smelt so good,
Gretel thought: ‘Something might be wrong, it ought to be tasted!’
She touched it with her finger, and said: ‘Ah! how good fowls are! It
certainly is a sin and a shame that they are not eaten at the right
time!’ She ran to the window, to see if the master was not coming with
his guest, but she saw no one, and went back to the fowls and thought:
‘One of the wings is burning! I had better take it off and eat it.’
So she cut it off, ate it, and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she
thought: ‘The other must go down too, or else master will observe that
something is missing.’ When the two wings were eaten, she went and
looked for her master, and did not see him. It suddenly occurred to
her: ‘Who knows? They are perhaps not coming at all, and have turned in
somewhere.’ Then she said: ‘Well, Gretel, enjoy yourself, one fowl has
been cut into, take another drink, and eat it up entirely; when it is
eaten you will have some peace, why should God’s good gifts be spoilt?’
So she ran into the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up the
one chicken in great glee. When one of the chickens was swallowed down,
and still her master did not come, Gretel looked at the other and said:
‘What one is, the other should be likewise, the two go together; what’s
right for the one is right for the other; I think if I were to take
another draught it would do me no harm.’ So she took another hearty
drink, and let the second chicken follow the first.

While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried: ‘Hurry
up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me!’ ‘Yes, sir, I will
soon serve up,’ answered Gretel. Meantime the master looked to see that
the table was properly laid, and took the great knife, wherewith he was
going to carve the chickens, and sharpened it on the steps. Presently
the guest came, and knocked politely and courteously at the house-door.
Gretel ran, and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,
she put her finger to her lips and said: ‘Hush! hush! go away as quickly
as you can, if my master catches you it will be the worse for you; he
certainly did ask you to supper, but his intention is to cut off your
two ears. Just listen how he is sharpening the knife for it!’ The guest
heard the sharpening, and hurried down the steps again as fast as he
could. Gretel was not idle; she ran screaming to her master, and cried:
‘You have invited a fine guest!’ ‘Why, Gretel? What do you mean by
that?’ ‘Yes,’ said she, ‘he has taken the chickens which I was just
going to serve up, off the dish, and has run away with them!’ ‘That’s a
nice trick!’ said her master, and lamented the fine chickens. ‘If he had
but left me one, so that something remained for me to eat.’ He called to
him to stop, but the guest pretended not to hear. Then he ran after him
with the knife still in his hand, crying: ‘Just one, just one,’ meaning
that the guest should leave him just one chicken, and not take both. The
guest, however, thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of
his ears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order to take
them both with him.




THE OLD MAN AND HIS GRANDSON

There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his ears dull
of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table he could hardly
hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-cloth or let it run
out of his mouth. His son and his son’s wife were disgusted at this, so
the old grandfather at last had to sit in the corner behind the stove,
and they gave him his food in an earthenware bowl, and not even enough
of it. And he used to look towards the table with his eyes full of
tears. Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it
fell to the ground and broke. The young wife scolded him, but he said
nothing and only sighed. Then they brought him a wooden bowl for a few
half-pence, out of which he had to eat.

They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four years old
began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground. ‘What are
you doing there?’ asked the father. ‘I am making a little trough,’
answered the child, ‘for father and mother to eat out of when I am big.’

The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presently
began to cry. Then they took the old grandfather to the table, and
henceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing if he
did spill a little of anything.




THE LITTLE PEASANT

There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really rich
peasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the little peasant. He
had not even so much as a cow, and still less money to buy one, and
yet he and his wife did so wish to have one. One day he said to her:
‘Listen, I have a good idea, there is our gossip the carpenter, he shall
make us a wooden calf, and paint it brown, so that it looks like any
other, and in time it will certainly get big and be a cow.’ the woman
also liked the idea, and their gossip the carpenter cut and planed
the calf, and painted it as it ought to be, and made it with its head
hanging down as if it were eating.

Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the little peasant
called the cow-herd in and said: ‘Look, I have a little calf there,
but it is still small and has to be carried.’ The cow-herd said: ‘All
right,’ and took it in his arms and carried it to the pasture, and set
it among the grass. The little calf always remained standing like one
which was eating, and the cow-herd said: ‘It will soon run by itself,
just look how it eats already!’ At night when he was going to drive the
herd home again, he said to the calf: ‘If you can stand there and eat
your fill, you can also go on your four legs; I don’t care to drag you
home again in my arms.’ But the little peasant stood at his door, and
waited for his little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows through
the village, and the calf was missing, he inquired where it was. The
cow-herd answered: ‘It is still standing out there eating. It would not
stop and come with us.’ But the little peasant said: ‘Oh, but I must
have my beast back again.’ Then they went back to the meadow together,
but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone. The cow-herd said: ‘It
must have run away.’ The peasant, however, said: ‘Don’t tell me
that,’ and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for his carelessness
condemned him to give the peasant a cow for the calf which had run away.

And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for which they had
so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but they had no food for
it, and could give it nothing to eat, so it soon had to be killed. They
salted the flesh, and the peasant went into the town and wanted to sell
the skin there, so that he might buy a new calf with the proceeds. On
the way he passed by a mill, and there sat a raven with broken wings,
and out of pity he took him and wrapped him in the skin. But as the
weather grew so bad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could
go no farther, and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter. The
miller’s wife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant: ‘Lay
yourself on the straw there,’ and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.
The peasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and the woman
thought: ‘He is tired and has gone to sleep.’ In the meantime came the
parson; the miller’s wife received him well, and said: ‘My husband is
out, so we will have a feast.’ The peasant listened, and when he heard
them talk about feasting he was vexed that he had been forced to make
shift with a slice of bread and cheese. Then the woman served up four
different things, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.

Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knocking
outside. The woman said: ‘Oh, heavens! It is my husband!’ she quickly
hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wine under the pillow,
the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, and the parson in the closet
on the porch. Then she opened the door for her husband, and said: ‘Thank
heaven, you are back again! There is such a storm, it looks as if the
world were coming to an end.’ The miller saw the peasant lying on the
straw, and asked, ‘What is that fellow doing there?’ ‘Ah,’ said the
wife, ‘the poor knave came in the storm and rain, and begged for
shelter, so I gave him a bit of bread and cheese, and showed him where
the straw was.’ The man said: ‘I have no objection, but be quick and get
me something to eat.’ The woman said: ‘But I have nothing but bread and
cheese.’ ‘I am contented with anything,’ replied the husband, ‘so far as
I am concerned, bread and cheese will do,’ and looked at the peasant and
said: ‘Come and eat some more with me.’ The peasant did not require to
be invited twice, but got up and ate. After this the miller saw the skin
in which the raven was, lying on the ground, and asked: ‘What have you
there?’ The peasant answered: ‘I have a soothsayer inside it.’ ‘Can
he foretell anything to me?’ said the miller. ‘Why not?’ answered
the peasant: ‘but he only says four things, and the fifth he keeps to
himself.’ The miller was curious, and said: ‘Let him foretell something
for once.’ Then the peasant pinched the raven’s head, so that he croaked
and made a noise like krr, krr. The miller said: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant answered: ‘In the first place, he says that there is some wine
hidden under the pillow.’ ‘Bless me!’ cried the miller, and went there
and found the wine. ‘Now go on,’ said he. The peasant made the raven
croak again, and said: ‘In the second place, he says that there is some
roast meat in the tiled stove.’ ‘Upon my word!’ cried the miller, and
went thither, and found the roast meat. The peasant made the raven
prophesy still more, and said: ‘Thirdly, he says that there is some
salad on the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the miller, and
went there and found the salad. At last the peasant pinched the raven
once more till he croaked, and said: ‘Fourthly, he says that there
are some cakes under the bed.’ ‘That would be a fine thing!’ cried the
miller, and looked there, and found the cakes.

And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller’s wife
was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all the keys with
her. The miller would have liked much to know the fifth, but the little
peasant said: ‘First, we will quickly eat the four things, for the fifth
is something bad.’ So they ate, and after that they bargained how much
the miller was to give for the fifth prophecy, until they agreed on
three hundred talers. Then the peasant once more pinched the raven’s
head till he croaked loudly. The miller asked: ‘What did he say?’ The
peasant replied: ‘He says that the Devil is hiding outside there in
the closet on the porch.’ The miller said: ‘The Devil must go out,’ and
opened the house-door; then the woman was forced to give up the keys,
and the peasant unlocked the closet. The parson ran out as fast as he
could, and the miller said: ‘It was true; I saw the black rascal with my
own eyes.’ The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreak with
the three hundred talers.

At home the small peasant gradually launched out; he built a beautiful
house, and the peasants said: ‘The small peasant has certainly been to
the place where golden snow falls, and people carry the gold home in
shovels.’ Then the small peasant was brought before the mayor, and
bidden to say from whence his wealth came. He answered: ‘I sold my cow’s
skin in the town, for three hundred talers.’ When the peasants heard
that, they too wished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed
all their cows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in
the town to the greatest advantage. The mayor, however, said: ‘But my
servant must go first.’ When she came to the merchant in the town, he
did not give her more than two talers for a skin, and when the others
came, he did not give them so much, and said: ‘What can I do with all
these skins?’

Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should have thus
outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accused him of this
treachery before the mayor. The innocent little peasant was unanimously
sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water, in a barrel
pierced full of holes. He was led forth, and a priest was brought who
was to say a mass for his soul. The others were all obliged to retire to
a distance, and when the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the
man who had been with the miller’s wife. He said to him: ‘I set you free
from the closet, set me free from the barrel.’ At this same moment up
came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whom the peasant knew had
long been wishing to be mayor, so he cried with all his might: ‘No, I
will not do it; if the whole world insists on it, I will not do it!’ The
shepherd hearing that, came up to him, and asked: ‘What are you about?
What is it that you will not do?’ The peasant said: ‘They want to make
me mayor, if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.’
The shepherd said: ‘If nothing more than that is needful in order to be
mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.’ The peasant said: ‘If you
will get in, you will be mayor.’ The shepherd was willing, and got in,
and the peasant shut the top down on him; then he took the shepherd’s
flock for himself, and drove it away. The parson went to the crowd,
and declared that the mass had been said. Then they came and rolled the
barrel towards the water. When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd
cried: ‘I am quite willing to be mayor.’ They believed no otherwise than
that it was the peasant who was saying this, and answered: ‘That is
what we intend, but first you shall look about you a little down below
there,’ and they rolled the barrel down into the water.

After that the peasants went home, and as they were entering the
village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving a flock of
sheep and looking quite contented. Then the peasants were astonished,
and said: ‘Peasant, from whence do you come? Have you come out of the
water?’ ‘Yes, truly,’ replied the peasant, ‘I sank deep, deep down,
until at last I got to the bottom; I pushed the bottom out of the
barrel, and crept out, and there were pretty meadows on which a number
of lambs were feeding, and from thence I brought this flock away with
me.’ Said the peasants: ‘Are there any more there?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ said he,
‘more than I could want.’ Then the peasants made up their minds that
they too would fetch some sheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the
mayor said: ‘I come first.’ So they went to the water together, and just
then there were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, which
are called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water, whereupon
the peasants cried: ‘We already see the sheep down below!’ The mayor
pressed forward and said: ‘I will go down first, and look about me, and
if things promise well I’ll call you.’ So he jumped in; splash! went
the water; it sounded as if he were calling them, and the whole crowd
plunged in after him as one man. Then the entire village was dead, and
the small peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.




FREDERICK AND CATHERINE

There was once a man called Frederick: he had a wife whose name was
Catherine, and they had not long been married. One day Frederick said.
‘Kate! I am going to work in the fields; when I come back I shall be
hungry so let me have something nice cooked, and a good draught of ale.’
‘Very well,’ said she, ‘it shall all be ready.’ When dinner-time drew
nigh, Catherine took a nice steak, which was all the meat she had, and
put it on the fire to fry. The steak soon began to look brown, and to
crackle in the pan; and Catherine stood by with a fork and turned it:
then she said to herself, ‘The steak is almost ready, I may as well go
to the cellar for the ale.’ So she left the pan on the fire and took a
large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask. The beer ran
into the jug and Catherine stood looking on. At last it popped into her
head, ‘The dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak;
that’s well thought of.’ So up she ran from the cellar; and sure enough
the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth, and was making off with
it.

Away ran Catherine, and away ran the dog across the field: but he ran
faster than she, and stuck close to the steak. ‘It’s all gone, and “what
can’t be cured must be endured”,’ said Catherine. So she turned round;
and as she had run a good way and was tired, she walked home leisurely
to cool herself.

Now all this time the ale was running too, for Catherine had not turned
the cock; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till
the cask was empty. When she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had
happened. ‘My stars!’ said she, ‘what shall I do to keep Frederick from
seeing all this slopping about?’ So she thought a while; and at last
remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair,
and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale
nicely. ‘What a lucky thing,’ said she, ‘that we kept that meal! we have
now a good use for it.’ So away she went for it: but she managed to set
it down just upon the great jug full of beer, and upset it; and thus
all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also. ‘Ah!
well,’ said she, ‘when one goes another may as well follow.’ Then she
strewed the meal all about the cellar, and was quite pleased with her
cleverness, and said, ‘How very neat and clean it looks!’

At noon Frederick came home. ‘Now, wife,’ cried he, ‘what have you for
dinner?’ ‘O Frederick!’ answered she, ‘I was cooking you a steak; but
while I went down to draw the ale, the dog ran away with it; and while
I ran after him, the ale ran out; and when I went to dry up the ale
with the sack of meal that we got at the fair, I upset the jug: but the
cellar is now quite dry, and looks so clean!’ ‘Kate, Kate,’ said he,
‘how could you do all this?’ Why did you leave the steak to fry, and the
ale to run, and then spoil all the meal?’ ‘Why, Frederick,’ said she, ‘I
did not know I was doing wrong; you should have told me before.’

The husband thought to himself, ‘If my wife manages matters thus, I must
look sharp myself.’ Now he had a good deal of gold in the house: so he
said to Catherine, ‘What pretty yellow buttons these are! I shall put
them into a box and bury them in the garden; but take care that you
never go near or meddle with them.’ ‘No, Frederick,’ said she, ‘that
I never will.’ As soon as he was gone, there came by some pedlars with
earthenware plates and dishes, and they asked her whether she would buy.
‘Oh dear me, I should like to buy very much, but I have no money: if
you had any use for yellow buttons, I might deal with you.’ ‘Yellow
buttons!’ said they: ‘let us have a look at them.’ ‘Go into the garden
and dig where I tell you, and you will find the yellow buttons: I dare
not go myself.’ So the rogues went: and when they found what these
yellow buttons were, they took them all away, and left her plenty of
plates and dishes. Then she set them all about the house for a show:
and when Frederick came back, he cried out, ‘Kate, what have you been
doing?’ ‘See,’ said she, ‘I have bought all these with your yellow
buttons: but I did not touch them myself; the pedlars went themselves
and dug them up.’ ‘Wife, wife,’ said Frederick, ‘what a pretty piece of
work you have made! those yellow buttons were all my money: how came you
to do such a thing?’ ‘Why,’ answered she, ‘I did not know there was any
harm in it; you should have told me.’

Catherine stood musing for a while, and at last said to her husband,
‘Hark ye, Frederick, we will soon get the gold back: let us run after
the thieves.’ ‘Well, we will try,’ answered he; ‘but take some butter
and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat by the way.’
‘Very well,’ said she; and they set out: and as Frederick walked the
fastest, he left his wife some way behind. ‘It does not matter,’ thought
she: ‘when we turn back, I shall be so much nearer home than he.’

Presently she came to the top of a hill, down the side of which there
was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees
on each side as they passed. ‘Ah, see now,’ said she, ‘how they have
bruised and wounded those poor trees; they will never get well.’ So she
took pity on them, and made use of the butter to grease them all, so
that the wheels might not hurt them so much. While she was doing this
kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket, and rolled down
the hill. Catherine looked, but could not see where it had gone; so she
said, ‘Well, I suppose the other will go the same way and find you; he
has younger legs than I have.’ Then she rolled the other cheese after
it; and away it went, nobody knows where, down the hill. But she said
she supposed that they knew the road, and would follow her, and she
could not stay there all day waiting for them.

At last she overtook Frederick, who desired her to give him something to
eat. Then she gave him the dry bread. ‘Where are the butter and cheese?’
said he. ‘Oh!’ answered she, ‘I used the butter to grease those poor
trees that the wheels chafed so: and one of the cheeses ran away so I
sent the other after it to find it, and I suppose they are both on
the road together somewhere.’ ‘What a goose you are to do such silly
things!’ said the husband. ‘How can you say so?’ said she; ‘I am sure
you never told me not.’

They ate the dry bread together; and Frederick said, ‘Kate, I hope you
locked the door safe when you came away.’ ‘No,’ answered she, ‘you did
not tell me.’ ‘Then go home, and do it now before we go any farther,’
said Frederick, ‘and bring with you something to eat.’

Catherine did as he told her, and thought to herself by the way,
‘Frederick wants something to eat; but I don’t think he is very fond of
butter and cheese: I’ll bring him a bag of fine nuts, and the vinegar,
for I have often seen him take some.’

When she reached home, she bolted the back door, but the front door she
took off the hinges, and said, ‘Frederick told me to lock the door, but
surely it can nowhere be so safe if I take it with me.’ So she took
her time by the way; and when she overtook her husband she cried
out, ‘There, Frederick, there is the door itself, you may watch it as
carefully as you please.’ ‘Alas! alas!’ said he, ‘what a clever wife I
have! I sent you to make the house fast, and you take the door away, so
that everybody may go in and out as they please--however, as you have
brought the door, you shall carry it about with you for your pains.’
‘Very well,’ answered she, ‘I’ll carry the door; but I’ll not carry the
nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load; so if
you please, I’ll fasten them to the door.’

Frederick of course made no objection to that plan, and they set off
into the wood to look for the thieves; but they could not find them: and
when it grew dark, they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there.
Scarcely were they up, than who should come by but the very rogues they
were looking for. They were in truth great rascals, and belonged to that
class of people who find things before they are lost; they were tired;
so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where Frederick and
Catherine were. Frederick slipped down on the other side, and picked up
some stones. Then he climbed up again, and tried to hit the thieves on
the head with them: but they only said, ‘It must be near morning, for
the wind shakes the fir-apples down.’

Catherine, who had the door on her shoulder, began to be very tired;
but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy: so she said
softly, ‘Frederick, I must let the nuts go.’ ‘No,’ answered he, ‘not
now, they will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that: they must go.’ ‘Well,
then, make haste and throw them down, if you will.’ Then away rattled
the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried, ‘Bless me,
it is hailing.’

A little while after, Catherine thought the door was still very heavy:
so she whispered to Frederick, ‘I must throw the vinegar down.’ ‘Pray
don’t,’ answered he, ‘it will discover us.’ ‘I can’t help that,’ said
she, ‘go it must.’ So she poured all the vinegar down; and the thieves
said, ‘What a heavy dew there is!’

At last it popped into Catherine’s head that it was the door itself that
was so heavy all the time: so she whispered, ‘Frederick, I must throw
the door down soon.’ But he begged and prayed her not to do so, for he
was sure it would betray them. ‘Here goes, however,’ said she: and down
went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves, that they cried
out ‘Murder!’ and not knowing what was coming, ran away as fast as they
could, and left all the gold. So when Frederick and Catherine came down,
there they found all their money safe and sound.




SWEETHEART ROLAND

There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two
daughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because she was
her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one she hated,
because she was her stepdaughter. The stepdaughter once had a pretty
apron, which the other fancied so much that she became envious, and
told her mother that she must and would have that apron. ‘Be quiet, my
child,’ said the old woman, ‘and you shall have it. Your stepsister has
long deserved death; tonight when she is asleep I will come and cut her
head off. Only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed, and
push her well to the front.’ It would have been all over with the poor
girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner, and heard
everything. All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bedtime
had come, the witch’s daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at the
far side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to the
front, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall. In
the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in her right
hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside,
and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut her own child’s
head off.

When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart, who
was called Roland, and knocked at his door. When he came out, she said
to him: ‘Listen, dearest Roland, we must fly in all haste; my stepmother
wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child. When daylight comes,
and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.’ ‘But,’ said Roland,
‘I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, or we cannot escape
if she pursues us.’ The maiden fetched the magic wand, and she took the
dead girl’s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground, one in
front of the bed, one in the kitchen, and one on the stairs. Then she
hurried away with her lover.

When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, and
wanted to give her the apron, but she did not come. Then the witch
cried: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping,’ answered
the first drop of blood. The old woman went out, but saw no one on the
stairs, and cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Here in the kitchen, I am
warming myself,’ cried the second drop of blood. She went into the
kitchen, but found no one. Then she cried again: ‘Where are you?’ ‘Ah,
here in the bed, I am sleeping,’ cried the third drop of blood. She went
into the room to the bed. What did she see there? Her own child,
whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood. The witch fell into
a passion, sprang to the window, and as she could look forth quite far
into the world, she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her
sweetheart Roland. ‘That shall not help you,’ cried she, ‘even if you
have got a long way off, you shall still not escape me.’ She put on her
many-league boots, in which she covered an hour’s walk at every step,
and it was not long before she overtook them. The girl, however, when
she saw the old woman striding towards her, changed, with her magic
wand, her sweetheart Roland into a lake, and herself into a duck
swimming in the middle of it. The witch placed herself on the shore,
threw breadcrumbs in, and went to endless trouble to entice the duck;
but the duck did not let herself be enticed, and the old woman had to
go home at night as she had come. At this the girl and her sweetheart
Roland resumed their natural shapes again, and they walked on the whole
night until daybreak. Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful
flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart
Roland into a fiddler. It was not long before the witch came striding up
towards them, and said to the musician: ‘Dear musician, may I pluck that
beautiful flower for myself?’ ‘Oh, yes,’ he replied, ‘I will play to
you while you do it.’ As she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was
just going to pluck the flower, knowing perfectly well who the flower
was, he began to play, and whether she would or not, she was forced
to dance, for it was a magical dance. The faster he played, the more
violent springs was she forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes
from her body, and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he
did not stop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.

As they were now set free, Roland said: ‘Now I will go to my father and
arrange for the wedding.’ ‘Then in the meantime I will stay here and
wait for you,’ said the girl, ‘and that no one may recognize me, I will
change myself into a red stone landmark.’ Then Roland went away, and the
girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved.
But when Roland got home, he fell into the snares of another, who so
fascinated him that he forgot the maiden. The poor girl remained there a
long time, but at length, as he did not return at all, she was sad, and
changed herself into a flower, and thought: ‘Someone will surely come
this way, and trample me down.’

It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw
the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it with him, and
laid it away in his chest. From that time forth, strange things happened
in the shepherd’s house. When he arose in the morning, all the work was
already done, the room was swept, the table and benches cleaned, the
fire in the hearth was lighted, and the water was fetched, and at noon,
when he came home, the table was laid, and a good dinner served. He
could not conceive how this came to pass, for he never saw a human being
in his house, and no one could have concealed himself in it. He was
certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at last he was so
afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice. The wise
woman said: ‘There is some enchantment behind it, listen very early some
morning if anything is moving in the room, and if you see anything, no
matter what it is, throw a white cloth over it, and then the magic will
be stopped.’

The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as day dawned,
he saw the chest open, and the flower come out. Swiftly he
sprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it. Instantly the
transformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,
who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to this
time she had attended to his house-keeping. She told him her story,
and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but she
answered: ‘No,’ for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart
Roland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised not to
go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.

And now the time drew near when Roland’s wedding was to be celebrated,
and then, according to an old custom in the country, it was announced
that all the girls were to be present at it, and sing in honour of the
bridal pair. When the faithful maiden heard of this, she grew so sad
that she thought her heart would break, and she would not go thither,
but the other girls came and took her. When it came to her turn to sing,
she stepped back, until at last she was the only one left, and then she
could not refuse. But when she began her song, and it reached Roland’s
ears, he sprang up and cried: ‘I know the voice, that is the true
bride, I will have no other!’ Everything he had forgotten, and which had
vanished from his mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart. Then
the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart Roland, and
grief came to an end and joy began.




SNOWDROP

It was the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were falling
around, that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working
at her window. The frame of the window was made of fine black ebony, and
as she sat looking out upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three
drops of blood fell upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red
drops that sprinkled the white snow, and said, ‘Would that my little
daughter may be as white as that snow, as red as that blood, and as
black as this ebony windowframe!’ And so the little girl really did grow
up; her skin was as white as snow, her cheeks as rosy as the blood, and
her hair as black as ebony; and she was called Snowdrop.

But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who became
queen, and was very beautiful, but so vain that she could not bear
to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was. She had a fairy
looking-glass, to which she used to go, and then she would gaze upon
herself in it, and say:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass had always answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all the land.’

But Snowdrop grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven years
old she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen herself.
Then the glass one day answered the queen, when she went to look in it
as usual:

 ‘Thou, queen, art fair, and beauteous to see,
  But Snowdrop is lovelier far than thee!’

When she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy, and called to
one of her servants, and said, ‘Take Snowdrop away into the wide wood,
that I may never see her any more.’ Then the servant led her away; but
his heart melted when Snowdrop begged him to spare her life, and he
said, ‘I will not hurt you, thou pretty child.’ So he left her by
herself; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would
tear her in pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off his
heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to
her fate, with the chance of someone finding and saving her.

Then poor Snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear; and
the wild beasts roared about her, but none did her any harm. In the
evening she came to a cottage among the hills, and went in to rest, for
her little feet would carry her no further. Everything was spruce and
neat in the cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there
were seven little plates, seven little loaves, and seven little glasses
with wine in them; and seven knives and forks laid in order; and by
the wall stood seven little beds. As she was very hungry, she picked
a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each
glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest. So she
tried all the little beds; but one was too long, and another was too
short, till at last the seventh suited her: and there she laid herself
down and went to sleep.

By and by in came the masters of the cottage. Now they were seven little
dwarfs, that lived among the mountains, and dug and searched for gold.
They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw at once that all was not
right. The first said, ‘Who has been sitting on my stool?’ The second,
‘Who has been eating off my plate?’ The third, ‘Who has been picking my
bread?’ The fourth, ‘Who has been meddling with my spoon?’ The fifth,
‘Who has been handling my fork?’ The sixth, ‘Who has been cutting with
my knife?’ The seventh, ‘Who has been drinking my wine?’ Then the first
looked round and said, ‘Who has been lying on my bed?’ And the rest came
running to him, and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his
bed. But the seventh saw Snowdrop, and called all his brethren to come
and see her; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought
their lamps to look at her, and said, ‘Good heavens! what a lovely child
she is!’ And they were very glad to see her, and took care not to wake
her; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs
in turn, till the night was gone.

In the morning Snowdrop told them all her story; and they pitied her,
and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash and
knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would
take good care of her. Then they went out all day long to their work,
seeking for gold and silver in the mountains: but Snowdrop was left at
home; and they warned her, and said, ‘The queen will soon find out where
you are, so take care and let no one in.’

But the queen, now that she thought Snowdrop was dead, believed that she
must be the handsomest lady in the land; and she went to her glass and
said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the queen was very much frightened; for she knew that the glass
always spoke the truth, and was sure that the servant had betrayed her.
And she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful
than she was; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar, and went
her way over the hills, to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then she
knocked at the door, and cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ Snowdrop looked
out at the window, and said, ‘Good day, good woman! what have you to
sell?’ ‘Good wares, fine wares,’ said she; ‘laces and bobbins of all
colours.’ ‘I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good
sort of body,’ thought Snowdrop, as she ran down and unbolted the door.
‘Bless me!’ said the old woman, ‘how badly your stays are laced! Let me
lace them up with one of my nice new laces.’ Snowdrop did not dream of
any mischief; so she stood before the old woman; but she set to work
so nimbly, and pulled the lace so tight, that Snowdrop’s breath was
stopped, and she fell down as if she were dead. ‘There’s an end to all
thy beauty,’ said the spiteful queen, and went away home.

In the evening the seven dwarfs came home; and I need not say how
grieved they were to see their faithful Snowdrop stretched out upon the
ground, as if she was quite dead. However, they lifted her up, and when
they found what ailed her, they cut the lace; and in a little time she
began to breathe, and very soon came to life again. Then they said, ‘The
old woman was the queen herself; take care another time, and let no one
in when we are away.’

When the queen got home, she went straight to her glass, and spoke to it
as before; but to her great grief it still said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest in all this land:
  But over the hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snowdrop is hiding her head; and she
  Is lovelier far, O queen! than thee.’

Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice, to see that
Snowdrop still lived; and she dressed herself up again, but in quite
another dress from the one she wore before, and took with her a poisoned
comb. When she reached the dwarfs’ cottage, she knocked at the door, and
cried, ‘Fine wares to sell!’ But Snowdrop said, ‘I dare not let anyone
in.’ Then the queen said, ‘Only look at my beautiful combs!’ and gave
her the poisoned one. And it looked so pretty, that she took it up and
put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it touched her head,
the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless. ‘There you may
lie,’ said the queen, and went her way. But by good luck the dwarfs
came in very early that evening; and when they saw Snowdrop lying on
the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon found the poisoned
comb. And when they took it away she got well, and told them all that
had passed; and they warned her once more not to open the door to
anyone.

Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and shook with rage when she
read the very same answer as before; and she said, ‘Snowdrop shall die,
if it cost me my life.’ So she went by herself into her chamber, and got
ready a poisoned apple: the outside looked very rosy and tempting, but
whoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she dressed herself up as a
peasant’s wife, and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs’ cottage,
and knocked at the door; but Snowdrop put her head out of the window and
said, ‘I dare not let anyone in, for the dwarfs have told me not.’ ‘Do
as you please,’ said the old woman, ‘but at any rate take this pretty
apple; I will give it you.’ ‘No,’ said Snowdrop, ‘I dare not take it.’
‘You silly girl!’ answered the other, ‘what are you afraid of? Do you
think it is poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the
other.’ Now the apple was so made up that one side was good, though the
other side was poisoned. Then Snowdrop was much tempted to taste, for
the apple looked so very nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she
could wait no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth,
when she fell down dead upon the ground. ‘This time nothing will save
thee,’ said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and at last it
said:

 ‘Thou, queen, art the fairest of all the fair.’

And then her wicked heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart could
be.

When evening came, and the dwarfs had gone home, they found Snowdrop
lying on the ground: no breath came from her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair, and
washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain, for the little
girl seemed quite dead. So they laid her down upon a bier, and all seven
watched and bewailed her three whole days; and then they thought they
would bury her: but her cheeks were still rosy; and her face looked just
as it did while she was alive; so they said, ‘We will never bury her in
the cold ground.’ And they made a coffin of glass, so that they might
still look at her, and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name
was, and that she was a king’s daughter. And the coffin was set among
the hills, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched. And the
birds of the air came too, and bemoaned Snowdrop; and first of all came
an owl, and then a raven, and at last a dove, and sat by her side.

And thus Snowdrop lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as
though she was asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as red
as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and called at the
dwarfs’ house; and he saw Snowdrop, and read what was written in golden
letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and prayed and besought them
to let him take her away; but they said, ‘We will not part with her for
all the gold in the world.’ At last, however, they had pity on him, and
gave him the coffin; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home
with him, the piece of apple fell from between her lips, and Snowdrop
awoke, and said, ‘Where am I?’ And the prince said, ‘Thou art quite safe
with me.’

Then he told her all that had happened, and said, ‘I love you far better
than all the world; so come with me to my father’s palace, and you shall
be my wife.’ And Snowdrop consented, and went home with the prince;
and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their
wedding.

To the feast was asked, among the rest, Snowdrop’s old enemy the queen;
and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes, she looked in the
glass and said:

 ‘Tell me, glass, tell me true!
  Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest, tell me, who?’

And the glass answered:

 ‘Thou, lady, art loveliest here, I ween;
  But lovelier far is the new-made queen.’

When she heard this she started with rage; but her envy and curiosity
were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the bride. And
when she got there, and saw that it was no other than Snowdrop, who, as
she thought, had been dead a long while, she choked with rage, and fell
down and died: but Snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily
over that land many, many years; and sometimes they went up into the
mountains, and paid a visit to the little dwarfs, who had been so kind
to Snowdrop in her time of need.




THE PINK

There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.
Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven to
bestow on her a son or a daughter. Then an angel from heaven came to her
and said: ‘Be at rest, you shall have a son with the power of wishing,
so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall he have.’ Then
she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings, and when the time
was come she gave birth to a son, and the king was filled with gladness.

Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild
beasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream. It
happened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying in
her arms and she fell asleep. Then came the old cook, who knew that the
child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took a hen,
and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on the queen’s apron
and on her dress. Then he carried the child away to a secret place,
where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran to the king and
accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by
the wild beasts. When the king saw the blood on her apron, he believed
this, fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built,
in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into
it, and walled up. Here she was to stay for seven years without meat
or drink, and die of hunger. But God sent two angels from heaven in the
shape of white doves, which flew to her twice a day, and carried her
food until the seven years were over.

The cook, however, thought to himself: ‘If the child has the power of
wishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.’ So
he left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough to
speak, and said to him: ‘Wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with
a garden, and all else that pertains to it.’ Scarcely were the words out
of the boy’s mouth, when everything was there that he had wished for.
After a while the cook said to him: ‘It is not well for you to be so
alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.’ Then the king’s son
wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and was more
beautiful than any painter could have painted her. The two played
together, and loved each other with all their hearts, and the old cook
went out hunting like a nobleman. The thought occurred to him, however,
that the king’s son might some day wish to be with his father, and thus
bring him into great peril. So he went out and took the maiden aside,
and said: ‘Tonight when the boy is asleep, go to his bed and plunge this
knife into his heart, and bring me his heart and tongue, and if you do
not do it, you shall lose your life.’ Thereupon he went away, and when
he returned next day she had not done it, and said: ‘Why should I shed
the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anyone?’ The cook once
more said: ‘If you do not do it, it shall cost you your own life.’ When
he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, and ordered her
to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laid them on a plate,
and when she saw the old man coming, she said to the boy: ‘Lie down in
your bed, and draw the clothes over you.’ Then the wicked wretch came in
and said: ‘Where are the boy’s heart and tongue?’ The girl reached the
plate to him, but the king’s son threw off the quilt, and said: ‘You old
sinner, why did you want to kill me? Now will I pronounce thy sentence.
You shall become a black poodle and have a gold collar round your neck,
and shall eat burning coals, till the flames burst forth from your
throat.’ And when he had spoken these words, the old man was changed
into a poodle dog, and had a gold collar round his neck, and the cooks
were ordered to bring up some live coals, and these he ate, until the
flames broke forth from his throat. The king’s son remained there a
short while longer, and he thought of his mother, and wondered if she
were still alive. At length he said to the maiden: ‘I will go home to my
own country; if you will go with me, I will provide for you.’ ‘Ah,’
she replied, ‘the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strange land
where I am unknown?’ As she did not seem quite willing, and as they
could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might be changed
into a beautiful pink, and took her with him. Then he went away to his
own country, and the poodle had to run after him. He went to the tower
in which his mother was confined, and as it was so high, he wished for
a ladder which would reach up to the very top. Then he mounted up and
looked inside, and cried: ‘Beloved mother, Lady Queen, are you still
alive, or are you dead?’ She answered: ‘I have just eaten, and am still
satisfied,’ for she thought the angels were there. Said he: ‘I am your
dear son, whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms;
but I am alive still, and will soon set you free.’ Then he descended
again, and went to his father, and caused himself to be announced as a
strange huntsman, and asked if he could offer him service. The king said
yes, if he was skilful and could get game for him, he should come to
him, but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the
district or country. Then the huntsman promised to procure as much game
for him as he could possibly use at the royal table. So he summoned all
the huntsmen together, and bade them go out into the forest with him.
And he went with them and made them form a great circle, open at one end
where he stationed himself, and began to wish. Two hundred deer and more
came running inside the circle at once, and the huntsmen shot them.
Then they were all placed on sixty country carts, and driven home to the
king, and for once he was able to deck his table with game, after having
had none at all for years.

Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entire
household should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. When
they were all assembled together, he said to the huntsman: ‘As you are
so clever, you shall sit by me.’ He replied: ‘Lord King, your majesty
must excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.’ But the king insisted on it,
and said: ‘You shall sit by me,’ until he did it. Whilst he was sitting
there, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of the
king’s principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would ask how
it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alive still,
or had perished. Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began,
and said: ‘Your majesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen
living in the tower? Is she still alive, or has she died?’ But the king
replied: ‘She let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts; I will
not have her named.’ Then the huntsman arose and said: ‘Gracious lord
father she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away
by wild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from her
arms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a
chicken.’ Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said:
‘That is the wretch!’ and caused live coals to be brought, and these the
dog was compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burst
forth from its throat. On this the huntsman asked the king if he would
like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back into the form
of the cook, in which he stood immediately, with his white apron,
and his knife by his side. When the king saw him he fell into a passion,
and ordered him to be cast into the deepest dungeon. Then the huntsman
spoke further and said: ‘Father, will you see the maiden who brought me
up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder me, but did not do it,
though her own life depended on it?’ The king replied: ‘Yes, I would
like to see her.’ The son said: ‘Most gracious father, I will show her
to you in the form of a beautiful flower,’ and he thrust his hand into
his pocket and brought forth the pink, and placed it on the royal table,
and it was so beautiful that the king had never seen one to equal it.
Then the son said: ‘Now will I show her to you in her own form,’ and
wished that she might become a maiden, and she stood there looking so
beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so.

And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower,
to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But when she was
led in she ate nothing, and said: ‘The gracious and merciful God who has
supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.’ She lived three days
more, and then died happily, and when she was buried, the two white
doves which had brought her food to the tower, and were angels of
heaven, followed her body and seated themselves on her grave. The aged
king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces, but grief consumed the
king’s own heart, and he soon died. His son married the beautiful maiden
whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket, and whether they
are still alive or not, is known to God.




CLEVER ELSIE

There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie. And
when she had grown up her father said: ‘We will get her married.’ ‘Yes,’
said the mother, ‘if only someone would come who would have her.’ At
length a man came from a distance and wooed her, who was called Hans;
but he stipulated that Clever Elsie should be really smart. ‘Oh,’ said
the father, ‘she has plenty of good sense’; and the mother said: ‘Oh,
she can see the wind coming up the street, and hear the flies coughing.’
‘Well,’ said Hans, ‘if she is not really smart, I won’t have her.’ When
they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said: ‘Elsie, go
into the cellar and fetch some beer.’ Then Clever Elsie took the pitcher
from the wall, went into the cellar, and tapped the lid briskly as she
went, so that the time might not appear long. When she was below she
fetched herself a chair, and set it before the barrel so that she had
no need to stoop, and did not hurt her back or do herself any unexpected
injury. Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and
while the beer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but
looked up at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw a
pick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentally left
there.

Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said: ‘If I get Hans, and we have
a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw
beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then she
sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the
misfortune which lay before her. Those upstairs waited for the drink,
but Clever Elsie still did not come. Then the woman said to the servant:
‘Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie is.’ The maid went and
found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly. ‘Elsie why
do you weep?’ asked the maid. ‘Ah,’ she answered, ‘have I not reason to
weep? If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to
draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on his head, and kill
him.’ Then said the maid: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down
beside her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune. After a while,
as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were thirsty for the
beer, the man said to the boy: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie and the girl are.’ The boy went down, and there sat Clever
Elsie and the girl both weeping together. Then he asked: ‘Why are you
weeping?’ ‘Ah,’ said Elsie, ‘have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans,
and we have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the
pick-axe will fall on his head and kill him.’ Then said the boy: ‘What
a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down by her, and likewise began to
howl loudly. Upstairs they waited for the boy, but as he still did not
return, the man said to the woman: ‘Just go down into the cellar and see
where Elsie is!’ The woman went down, and found all three in the midst
of their lamentations, and inquired what was the cause; then Elsie told
her also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe, when it
grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe fell down. Then said the
mother likewise: ‘What a clever Elsie we have!’ and sat down and wept
with them. The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not
come back and his thirst grew ever greater, he said: ‘I must go into the
cellar myself and see where Elsie is.’ But when he got into the cellar,
and they were all sitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and
that Elsie’s child was the cause, and the Elsie might perhaps bring one
into the world some day, and that he might be killed by the pick-axe, if
he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawing beer just at the very
time when it fell down, he cried: ‘Oh, what a clever Elsie!’ and sat
down, and likewise wept with them. The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone
for a long time; then as no one would come back he thought: ‘They must be
waiting for me below: I too must go there and see what they are about.’
When he got down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each out-doing the other. ‘What misfortune has happened
then?’ asked he. ‘Ah, dear Hans,’ said Elsie, ‘if we marry each other
and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw
something to drink, then the pick-axe which has been left up there might
dash his brains out if it were to fall down, so have we not reason to
weep?’ ‘Come,’ said Hans, ‘more understanding than that is not needed
for my household, as you are such a clever Elsie, I will have you,’ and
seized her hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said: ‘Wife, I am going out to work
and earn some money for us; go into the field and cut the corn that we
may have some bread.’ ‘Yes, dear Hans, I will do that.’ After Hans had
gone away, she cooked herself some good broth and took it into the field
with her. When she came to the field she said to herself: ‘What shall I
do; shall I cut first, or shall I eat first? Oh, I will eat first.’ Then
she drank her cup of broth and when she was fully satisfied, she once
more said: ‘What shall I do? Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first?
I will sleep first.’ Then she lay down among the corn and fell asleep.
Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come; then said
he: ‘What a clever Elsie I have; she is so industrious that she does not
even come home to eat.’ But when evening came and she still stayed away,
Hans went out to see what she had cut, but nothing was cut, and she
was lying among the corn asleep. Then Hans hastened home and brought
a fowler’s net with little bells and hung it round about her, and she
still went on sleeping. Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat
down in his chair and worked. At length, when it was quite dark, Clever
Elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling all round about
her, and the bells rang at each step which she took. Then she was
alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really was Clever Elsie or
not, and said: ‘Is it I, or is it not I?’ But she knew not what answer
to make to this, and stood for a time in doubt; at length she thought:
‘I will go home and ask if it be I, or if it be not I, they will be sure
to know.’ She ran to the door of her own house, but it was shut; then
she knocked at the window and cried: ‘Hans, is Elsie within?’ ‘Yes,’
answered Hans, ‘she is within.’ Hereupon she was terrified, and said:
‘Ah, heavens! Then it is not I,’ and went to another door; but when the
people heard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and she
could get in nowhere. Then she ran out of the village, and no one has
seen her since.




THE MISER IN THE BUSH

A farmer had a faithful and diligent servant, who had worked hard for
him three years, without having been paid any wages. At last it came
into the man’s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer;
so he went to his master, and said, ‘I have worked hard for you a long
time, I will trust to you to give me what I deserve to have for my
trouble.’ The farmer was a sad miser, and knew that his man was very
simple-hearted; so he took out threepence, and gave him for every year’s
service a penny. The poor fellow thought it was a great deal of money to
have, and said to himself, ‘Why should I work hard, and live here on bad
fare any longer? I can now travel into the wide world, and make myself
merry.’ With that he put his money into his purse, and set out, roaming
over hill and valley.

As he jogged along over the fields, singing and dancing, a little dwarf
met him, and asked him what made him so merry. ‘Why, what should make
me down-hearted?’ said he; ‘I am sound in health and rich in purse, what
should I care for? I have saved up my three years’ earnings and have it
all safe in my pocket.’ ‘How much may it come to?’ said the little man.
‘Full threepence,’ replied the countryman. ‘I wish you would give them
to me,’ said the other; ‘I am very poor.’ Then the man pitied him, and
gave him all he had; and the little dwarf said in return, ‘As you have
such a kind honest heart, I will grant you three wishes--one for every
penny; so choose whatever you like.’ Then the countryman rejoiced at
his good luck, and said, ‘I like many things better than money: first, I
will have a bow that will bring down everything I shoot at; secondly,
a fiddle that will set everyone dancing that hears me play upon it; and
thirdly, I should like that everyone should grant what I ask.’ The dwarf
said he should have his three wishes; so he gave him the bow and fiddle,
and went his way.

Our honest friend journeyed on his way too; and if he was merry before,
he was now ten times more so. He had not gone far before he met an old
miser: close by them stood a tree, and on the topmost twig sat a thrush
singing away most joyfully. ‘Oh, what a pretty bird!’ said the miser; ‘I
would give a great deal of money to have such a one.’ ‘If that’s all,’
said the countryman, ‘I will soon bring it down.’ Then he took up his
bow, and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree.
The miser crept into the bush to find it; but directly he had got into
the middle, his companion took up his fiddle and played away, and the
miser began to dance and spring about, capering higher and higher in
the air. The thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung
in rags about him, and he himself was all scratched and wounded, so that
the blood ran down. ‘Oh, for heaven’s sake!’ cried the miser, ‘Master!
master! pray let the fiddle alone. What have I done to deserve this?’
‘Thou hast shaved many a poor soul close enough,’ said the other; ‘thou
art only meeting thy reward’: so he played up another tune. Then the
miser began to beg and promise, and offered money for his liberty; but
he did not come up to the musician’s price for some time, and he danced
him along brisker and brisker, and the miser bid higher and higher, till
at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse,
and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow. When the countryman
saw so much money, he said, ‘I will agree to your proposal.’ So he took
the purse, put up his fiddle, and travelled on very pleased with his
bargain.

Meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous
plight, and began to ponder how he should take his revenge, and serve
his late companion some trick. At last he went to the judge, and
complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money, and beaten him
into the bargain; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his
back and a fiddle hung round his neck. Then the judge sent out his
officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him; and he
was soon caught and brought up to be tried.

The miser began to tell his tale, and said he had been robbed of
his money. ‘No, you gave it me for playing a tune to you.’ said the
countryman; but the judge told him that was not likely, and cut the
matter short by ordering him off to the gallows.

So away he was taken; but as he stood on the steps he said, ‘My Lord
Judge, grant me one last request.’ ‘Anything but thy life,’ replied the
other. ‘No,’ said he, ‘I do not ask my life; only to let me play upon
my fiddle for the last time.’ The miser cried out, ‘Oh, no! no! for
heaven’s sake don’t listen to him! don’t listen to him!’ But the judge
said, ‘It is only this once, he will soon have done.’ The fact was, he
could not refuse the request, on account of the dwarf’s third gift.

Then the miser said, ‘Bind me fast, bind me fast, for pity’s sake.’ But
the countryman seized his fiddle, and struck up a tune, and at the first
note judge, clerks, and jailer were in motion; all began capering, and
no one could hold the miser. At the second note the hangman let his
prisoner go, and danced also, and by the time he had played the first
bar of the tune, all were dancing together--judge, court, and miser, and
all the people who had followed to look on. At first the thing was merry
and pleasant enough; but when it had gone on a while, and there seemed
to be no end of playing or dancing, they began to cry out, and beg him
to leave off; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties,
till the judge not only gave him his life, but promised to return him
the hundred florins.

Then he called to the miser, and said, ‘Tell us now, you vagabond, where
you got that gold, or I shall play on for your amusement only,’ ‘I stole
it,’ said the miser in the presence of all the people; ‘I acknowledge
that I stole it, and that you earned it fairly.’ Then the countryman
stopped his fiddle, and left the miser to take his place at the gallows.




ASHPUTTEL

The wife of a rich man fell sick; and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bed-side, and said, ‘Always be
a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you.’ Soon
afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden;
and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always
good and kind to all about her. And the snow fell and spread a beautiful
white covering over the grave; but by the time the spring came, and the
sun had melted it away again, her father had married another wife. This
new wife had two daughters of her own, that she brought home with her;
they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it was now a sorry time
for the poor little girl. ‘What does the good-for-nothing want in the
parlour?’ said they; ‘they who would eat bread should first earn it;
away with the kitchen-maid!’ Then they took away her fine clothes, and
gave her an old grey frock to put on, and laughed at her, and turned her
into the kitchen.

There she was forced to do hard work; to rise early before daylight, to
bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. Besides that,
the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways, and laughed at her. In the
evening when she was tired, she had no bed to lie down on, but was made
to lie by the hearth among the ashes; and as this, of course, made her
always dusty and dirty, they called her Ashputtel.

It happened once that the father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife’s daughters what he should bring them. ‘Fine clothes,’ said the
first; ‘Pearls and diamonds,’ cried the second. ‘Now, child,’ said he
to his own daughter, ‘what will you have?’ ‘The first twig, dear
father, that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come
homewards,’ said she. Then he bought for the first two the fine clothes
and pearls and diamonds they had asked for: and on his way home, as he
rode through a green copse, a hazel twig brushed against him, and almost
pushed off his hat: so he broke it off and brought it away; and when he
got home he gave it to his daughter. Then she took it, and went to
her mother’s grave and planted it there; and cried so much that it was
watered with her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree. Three
times every day she went to it and cried; and soon a little bird came
and built its nest upon the tree, and talked with her, and watched over
her, and brought her whatever she wished for.

Now it happened that the king of that land held a feast, which was to
last three days; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose
a bride for himself. Ashputtel’s two sisters were asked to come; so they
called her up, and said, ‘Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes, and tie
our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king’s feast.’
Then she did as she was told; but when all was done she could not help
crying, for she thought to herself, she should so have liked to have
gone with them to the ball; and at last she begged her mother very hard
to let her go. ‘You, Ashputtel!’ said she; ‘you who have nothing to
wear, no clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to
the ball? And when she kept on begging, she said at last, to get rid of
her, ‘I will throw this dishful of peas into the ash-heap, and if in
two hours’ time you have picked them all out, you shall go to the feast
too.’

Then she threw the peas down among the ashes, but the little maiden ran
out at the back door into the garden, and cried out:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves, flying in at the kitchen window; next
came two turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under
heaven, chirping and fluttering in: and they flew down into the ashes.
And the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work, pick,
pick, pick; and then the others began to pick, pick, pick: and among
them all they soon picked out all the good grain, and put it into a dish
but left the ashes. Long before the end of the hour the work was quite
done, and all flew out again at the windows.

Then Ashputtel brought the dish to her mother, overjoyed at the thought
that now she should go to the ball. But the mother said, ‘No, no! you
slut, you have no clothes, and cannot dance; you shall not go.’ And when
Ashputtel begged very hard to go, she said, ‘If you can in one hour’s
time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes, you shall go
too.’ And thus she thought she should at least get rid of her. So she
shook two dishes of peas into the ashes.

But the little maiden went out into the garden at the back of the house,
and cried out as before:

 ‘Hither, hither, through the sky,
  Turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay,
  Hither, hither, haste away!
  One and all come help me, quick!
  Haste ye, haste ye!--pick, pick, pick!’

Then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window; next came two
turtle-doves; and after them came all the little birds under heaven,
chirping and hopping about. And they flew down into the ashes; and the
little doves put their heads down and set to work, pick, pick, pick; and
then the others began pick, pick, pick; and they put all the good grain
into the dishes, and left all the ashes. Before half an hour’s time all
was done, and out they flew again. And then Ashputtel took the dishes to
her mother, rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball.
But her mother said, ‘It is all of no use, you cannot go; you have no
clothes, and cannot dance, and you would only put us to shame’: and off
she went with her two daughters to the ball.

Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Ashputtel went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree, and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
and thought it must be some strange princess, she looked so fine and
beautiful in her rich clothes; and they never once thought of Ashputtel,
taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt.

The king’s son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and danced
with her, and no one else: and he never left her hand; but when anyone
else came to ask her to dance, he said, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

Thus they danced till a late hour of the night; and then she wanted to
go home: and the king’s son said, ‘I shall go and take care of you to
your home’; for he wanted to see where the beautiful maiden lived. But
she slipped away from him, unawares, and ran off towards home; and as
the prince followed her, she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut
the door. Then he waited till her father came home, and told him that
the unknown maiden, who had been at the feast, had hid herself in the
pigeon-house. But when they had broken open the door they found no one
within; and as they came back into the house, Ashputtel was lying, as
she always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes, and her dim little
lamp was burning in the chimney. For she had run as quickly as she could
through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had there taken
off her beautiful clothes, and put them beneath the tree, that the bird
might carry them away, and had lain down again amid the ashes in her
little grey frock.

The next day when the feast was again held, and her father, mother, and
sisters were gone, Ashputtel went to the hazel-tree, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

And the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she
had worn the day before. And when she came in it to the ball, everyone
wondered at her beauty: but the king’s son, who was waiting for her,
took her by the hand, and danced with her; and when anyone asked her to
dance, he said as before, ‘This lady is dancing with me.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son followed here
as before, that he might see into what house she went: but she sprang
away from him all at once into the garden behind her father’s house.
In this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit; and
Ashputtel, not knowing where to hide herself, jumped up into it without
being seen. Then the king’s son lost sight of her, and could not find
out where she was gone, but waited till her father came home, and said
to him, ‘The unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away, and I
think she must have sprung into the pear-tree.’ The father thought to
himself, ‘Can it be Ashputtel?’ So he had an axe brought; and they cut
down the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into
the kitchen, there lay Ashputtel among the ashes; for she had slipped
down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes
back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little grey
frock.

The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone, she
went again into the garden, and said:

 ‘Shake, shake, hazel-tree,
  Gold and silver over me!’

Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former one, and slippers which were all of gold: so that when she came
to the feast no one knew what to say, for wonder at her beauty: and the
king’s son danced with nobody but her; and when anyone else asked her to
dance, he said, ‘This lady is _my_ partner, sir.’

When night came she wanted to go home; and the king’s son would go with
her, and said to himself, ‘I will not lose her this time’; but, however,
she again slipped away from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped
her left golden slipper upon the stairs.

The prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king his father,
and said, ‘I will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper
fits.’ Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it; for they
had beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden
slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper was, and
wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her great toe could
not go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her. Then
the mother gave her a knife, and said, ‘Never mind, cut it off; when you
are queen you will not care about toes; you will not want to walk.’ So
the silly girl cut off her great toe, and thus squeezed on the shoe,
and went to the king’s son. Then he took her for his bride, and set her
beside him on his horse, and rode away with her homewards.

But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Ashputtel
had planted; and on the branch sat a little dove singing:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then the prince got down and looked at her foot; and he saw, by the
blood that streamed from it, what a trick she had played him. So he
turned his horse round, and brought the false bride back to her home,
and said, ‘This is not the right bride; let the other sister try and put
on the slipper.’ Then she went into the room and got her foot into the
shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her mother squeezed it
in till the blood came, and took her to the king’s son: and he set her
as his bride by his side on his horse, and rode away with her.

But when they came to the hazel-tree the little dove sat there still,
and sang:

 ‘Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she’s not the true one that sits by thy side.’

Then he looked down, and saw that the blood streamed so much from the
shoe, that her white stockings were quite red. So he turned his horse
and brought her also back again. ‘This is not the true bride,’ said he
to the father; ‘have you no other daughters?’ ‘No,’ said he; ‘there is
only a little dirty Ashputtel here, the child of my first wife; I am
sure she cannot be the bride.’ The prince told him to send her. But the
mother said, ‘No, no, she is much too dirty; she will not dare to show
herself.’ However, the prince would have her come; and she first washed
her face and hands, and then went in and curtsied to him, and he reached
her the golden slipper. Then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot,
and put on the golden slipper; and it fitted her as if it had been made
for her. And when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her, and
said, ‘This is the right bride.’ But the mother and both the sisters
were frightened, and turned pale with anger as he took Ashputtel on his
horse, and rode away with her. And when they came to the hazel-tree, the
white dove sang:

 ‘Home! home! look at the shoe!
  Princess! the shoe was made for you!
  Prince! prince! take home thy bride,
  For she is the true one that sits by thy side!’

And when the dove had done its song, it came flying, and perched upon
her right shoulder, and so went home with her.




THE WHITE SNAKE

A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdom through
all the land. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as if news of
the most secret things was brought to him through the air. But he had a
strange custom; every day after dinner, when the table was cleared,
and no one else was present, a trusty servant had to bring him one more
dish. It was covered, however, and even the servant did not know what
was in it, neither did anyone know, for the king never took off the
cover to eat of it until he was quite alone.

This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took
away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help
carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door,
he lifted up the cover, and saw a white snake lying on the dish. But
when he saw it he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it,
so he cut of a little bit and put it into his mouth. No sooner had it
touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering of little voices
outside his window. He went and listened, and then noticed that it was
the sparrows who were chattering together, and telling one another of
all kinds of things which they had seen in the fields and woods. Eating
the snake had given him power of understanding the language of animals.

Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty
servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The king ordered the man to
be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he
could before the morrow point out the thief, he himself should be looked
upon as guilty and executed. In vain he declared his innocence; he was
dismissed with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and took thought
how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were sitting
together quietly by a brook and taking their rest; and, whilst they
were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were having a
confidential conversation together. The servant stood by and listened.
They were telling one another of all the places where they had been
waddling about all the morning, and what good food they had found; and
one said in a pitiful tone: ‘Something lies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the queen’s
window.’ The servant at once seized her by the neck, carried her to the
kitchen, and said to the cook: ‘Here is a fine duck; pray, kill her.’
‘Yes,’ said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; ‘she has spared
no trouble to fatten herself, and has been waiting to be roasted long
enough.’ So he cut off her head, and as she was being dressed for the
spit, the queen’s ring was found inside her.

The servant could now easily prove his innocence; and the king, to make
amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favour, and promised him
the best place in the court that he could wish for. The servant refused
everything, and only asked for a horse and some money for travelling, as
he had a mind to see the world and go about a little. When his request
was granted he set out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he
saw three fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water. Now, though
it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must
perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart, he got off his
horse and put the three prisoners back into the water. They leapt with
delight, put out their heads, and cried to him: ‘We will remember you
and repay you for saving us!’

He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in
the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an ant-king complain: ‘Why
cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies? That stupid
horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without
mercy!’ So he turned on to a side path and the ant-king cried out to
him: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves another!’

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing
by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. ‘Out with you, you
idle, good-for-nothing creatures!’ cried they; ‘we cannot find food for
you any longer; you are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.’
But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground, flapping their wings, and
crying: ‘Oh, what helpless chicks we are! We must shift for ourselves,
and yet we cannot fly! What can we do, but lie here and starve?’ So the
good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword, and gave
it to them for food. Then they came hopping up to it, satisfied their
hunger, and cried: ‘We will remember you--one good turn deserves
another!’

And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long
way, he came to a large city. There was a great noise and crowd in
the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying aloud: ‘The king’s
daughter wants a husband; but whoever seeks her hand must perform a hard
task, and if he does not succeed he will forfeit his life.’ Many had
already made the attempt, but in vain; nevertheless when the youth
saw the king’s daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty that he
forgot all danger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown into it, before
his eyes; then the king ordered him to fetch this ring up from the
bottom of the sea, and added: ‘If you come up again without it you will
be thrown in again and again until you perish amid the waves.’ All the
people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away, leaving him
alone by the sea.

He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly
he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and they were the very
fishes whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in
its mouth, which it laid on the shore at the youth’s feet, and when he
had taken it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell.
Full of joy he took it to the king and expected that he would grant him
the promised reward.

But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equal in
birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another
task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten
sacksful of millet-seed on the grass; then she said: ‘Tomorrow morning
before sunrise these must be picked up, and not a single grain be
wanting.’

The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it might be possible
to perform this task, but he could think of nothing, and there he sat
sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when he should be led to death.
But as soon as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden he saw
all the ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single
grain was missing. The ant-king had come in the night with thousands
and thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry
picked up all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.

Presently the king’s daughter herself came down into the garden, and was
amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given him.
But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said: ‘Although he
has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband until he had
brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.’ The youth did not know where
the Tree of Life stood, but he set out, and would have gone on for ever,
as long as his legs would carry him, though he had no hope of finding
it. After he had wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to
a wood, and lay down under a tree to sleep. But he heard a rustling in
the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand. At the same time
three ravens flew down to him, perched themselves upon his knee, and
said: ‘We are the three young ravens whom you saved from starving; when
we had grown big, and heard that you were seeking the Golden Apple,
we flew over the sea to the end of the world, where the Tree of Life
stands, and have brought you the apple.’ The youth, full of joy, set out
homewards, and took the Golden Apple to the king’s beautiful daughter,
who had now no more excuses left to make. They cut the Apple of Life in
two and ate it together; and then her heart became full of love for him,
and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.




THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS

There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One day she
wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she called all
seven to her and said: ‘Dear children, I have to go into the forest,
be on your guard against the wolf; if he comes in, he will devour you
all--skin, hair, and everything. The wretch often disguises himself, but
you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet.’ The
kids said: ‘Dear mother, we will take good care of ourselves; you may go
away without any anxiety.’ Then the old one bleated, and went on her way
with an easy mind.

It was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called:
‘Open the door, dear children; your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.’ But the little kids knew that
it was the wolf, by the rough voice. ‘We will not open the door,’ cried
they, ‘you are not our mother. She has a soft, pleasant voice, but
your voice is rough; you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf went away to a
shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate this and made
his voice soft with it. Then he came back, knocked at the door of the
house, and called: ‘Open the door, dear children, your mother is here
and has brought something back with her for each of you.’ But the wolf
had laid his black paws against the window, and the children saw them
and cried: ‘We will not open the door, our mother has not black feet
like you: you are the wolf!’ Then the wolf ran to a baker and said: ‘I
have hurt my feet, rub some dough over them for me.’ And when the baker
had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and said: ‘Strew some
white meal over my feet for me.’ The miller thought to himself: ‘The
wolf wants to deceive someone,’ and refused; but the wolf said: ‘If you
will not do it, I will devour you.’ Then the miller was afraid, and made
his paws white for him. Truly, this is the way of mankind.

So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it and said: ‘Open the door for me, children, your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something back from the
forest with her.’ The little kids cried: ‘First show us your paws that
we may know if you are our dear little mother.’ Then he put his paws
in through the window and when the kids saw that they were white, they
believed that all he said was true, and opened the door. But who should
come in but the wolf! They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves.
One sprang under the table, the second into the bed, the third into the
stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the
sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But
the wolf found them all, and used no great ceremony; one after the
other he swallowed them down his throat. The youngest, who was in
the clock-case, was the only one he did not find. When the wolf had
satisfied his appetite he took himself off, laid himself down under a
tree in the green meadow outside, and began to sleep. Soon afterwards
the old goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what a sight she saw
there! The house-door stood wide open. The table, chairs, and benches
were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts
and pillows were pulled off the bed. She sought her children, but they
were nowhere to be found. She called them one after another by name, but
no one answered. At last, when she came to the youngest, a soft voice
cried: ‘Dear mother, I am in the clock-case.’ She took the kid out, and
it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others. Then
you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.

At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran with her.
When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the tree and snored
so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on every side and
saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly. ‘Ah,
heavens,’ she said, ‘is it possible that my poor children whom he has
swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?’ Then the kid had to
run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and thread, and the goat cut
open the monster’s stomach, and hardly had she made one cut, than one
little kid thrust its head out, and when she had cut farther, all six
sprang out one after another, and were all still alive, and had suffered
no injury whatever, for in his greediness the monster had swallowed them
down whole. What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother,
and jumped like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said: ‘Now
go and look for some big stones, and we will fill the wicked beast’s
stomach with them while he is still asleep.’ Then the seven kids dragged
the stones thither with all speed, and put as many of them into this
stomach as they could get in; and the mother sewed him up again in the
greatest haste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once
stirred.

When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on his legs,
and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to
go to a well to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the
stones in his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried
he:

 ‘What rumbles and tumbles
  Against my poor bones?
  I thought ‘twas six kids,
  But it feels like big stones.’

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, the
heavy stones made him fall in, and he drowned miserably. When the seven
kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried aloud: ‘The wolf
is dead! The wolf is dead!’ and danced for joy round about the well with
their mother.




THE QUEEN BEE

Two kings’ sons once upon a time went into the world to seek their
fortunes; but they soon fell into a wasteful foolish way of living, so
that they could not return home again. Then their brother, who was a
little insignificant dwarf, went out to seek for his brothers: but when
he had found them they only laughed at him, to think that he, who was so
young and simple, should try to travel through the world, when they, who
were so much wiser, had been unable to get on. However, they all set
out on their journey together, and came at last to an ant-hill. The two
elder brothers would have pulled it down, in order to see how the poor
ants in their fright would run about and carry off their eggs. But the
little dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, I will not
suffer you to trouble them.’

So on they went, and came to a lake where many many ducks were swimming
about. The two brothers wanted to catch two, and roast them. But the
dwarf said, ‘Let the poor things enjoy themselves, you shall not kill
them.’ Next they came to a bees’-nest in a hollow tree, and there was
so much honey that it ran down the trunk; and the two brothers wanted to
light a fire under the tree and kill the bees, so as to get their honey.
But the dwarf held them back, and said, ‘Let the pretty insects enjoy
themselves, I cannot let you burn them.’

At length the three brothers came to a castle: and as they passed by the
stables they saw fine horses standing there, but all were of marble, and
no man was to be seen. Then they went through all the rooms, till they
came to a door on which were three locks: but in the middle of the door
was a wicket, so that they could look into the next room. There they saw
a little grey old man sitting at a table; and they called to him once or
twice, but he did not hear: however, they called a third time, and then
he rose and came out to them.

He said nothing, but took hold of them and led them to a beautiful
table covered with all sorts of good things: and when they had eaten and
drunk, he showed each of them to a bed-chamber.

The next morning he came to the eldest and took him to a marble table,
where there were three tablets, containing an account of the means by
which the castle might be disenchanted. The first tablet said: ‘In the
wood, under the moss, lie the thousand pearls belonging to the king’s
daughter; they must all be found: and if one be missing by set of sun,
he who seeks them will be turned into marble.’

The eldest brother set out, and sought for the pearls the whole day:
but the evening came, and he had not found the first hundred: so he was
turned into stone as the tablet had foretold.

The next day the second brother undertook the task; but he succeeded no
better than the first; for he could only find the second hundred of the
pearls; and therefore he too was turned into stone.

At last came the little dwarf’s turn; and he looked in the moss; but it
was so hard to find the pearls, and the job was so tiresome!--so he sat
down upon a stone and cried. And as he sat there, the king of the ants
(whose life he had saved) came to help him, with five thousand ants; and
it was not long before they had found all the pearls and laid them in a
heap.

The second tablet said: ‘The key of the princess’s bed-chamber must be
fished up out of the lake.’ And as the dwarf came to the brink of it,
he saw the two ducks whose lives he had saved swimming about; and they
dived down and soon brought in the key from the bottom.

The third task was the hardest. It was to choose out the youngest and
the best of the king’s three daughters. Now they were all beautiful, and
all exactly alike: but he was told that the eldest had eaten a piece of
sugar, the next some sweet syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey;
so he was to guess which it was that had eaten the honey.

Then came the queen of the bees, who had been saved by the little dwarf
from the fire, and she tried the lips of all three; but at last she sat
upon the lips of the one that had eaten the honey: and so the dwarf knew
which was the youngest. Thus the spell was broken, and all who had been
turned into stones awoke, and took their proper forms. And the dwarf
married the youngest and the best of the princesses, and was king after
her father’s death; but his two brothers married the other two sisters.




THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER

There was once a shoemaker, who worked very hard and was very honest:
but still he could not earn enough to live upon; and at last all he
had in the world was gone, save just leather enough to make one pair of
shoes.

Then he cut his leather out, all ready to make up the next day, meaning
to rise early in the morning to his work. His conscience was clear and
his heart light amidst all his troubles; so he went peaceably to bed,
left all his cares to Heaven, and soon fell asleep. In the morning after
he had said his prayers, he sat himself down to his work; when, to his
great wonder, there stood the shoes all ready made, upon the table. The
good man knew not what to say or think at such an odd thing happening.
He looked at the workmanship; there was not one false stitch in the
whole job; all was so neat and true, that it was quite a masterpiece.

The same day a customer came in, and the shoes suited him so well that
he willingly paid a price higher than usual for them; and the poor
shoemaker, with the money, bought leather enough to make two pairs more.
In the evening he cut out the work, and went to bed early, that he might
get up and begin betimes next day; but he was saved all the trouble, for
when he got up in the morning the work was done ready to his hand. Soon
in came buyers, who paid him handsomely for his goods, so that he bought
leather enough for four pair more. He cut out the work again overnight
and found it done in the morning, as before; and so it went on for some
time: what was got ready in the evening was always done by daybreak, and
the good man soon became thriving and well off again.

One evening, about Christmas-time, as he and his wife were sitting over
the fire chatting together, he said to her, ‘I should like to sit up and
watch tonight, that we may see who it is that comes and does my work for
me.’ The wife liked the thought; so they left a light burning, and hid
themselves in a corner of the room, behind a curtain that was hung up
there, and watched what would happen.

As soon as it was midnight, there came in two little naked dwarfs; and
they sat themselves upon the shoemaker’s bench, took up all the work
that was cut out, and began to ply with their little fingers, stitching
and rapping and tapping away at such a rate, that the shoemaker was all
wonder, and could not take his eyes off them. And on they went, till the
job was quite done, and the shoes stood ready for use upon the table.
This was long before daybreak; and then they bustled away as quick as
lightning.

The next day the wife said to the shoemaker. ‘These little wights have
made us rich, and we ought to be thankful to them, and do them a good
turn if we can. I am quite sorry to see them run about as they do; and
indeed it is not very decent, for they have nothing upon their backs to
keep off the cold. I’ll tell you what, I will make each of them a shirt,
and a coat and waistcoat, and a pair of pantaloons into the bargain; and
do you make each of them a little pair of shoes.’

The thought pleased the good cobbler very much; and one evening, when
all the things were ready, they laid them on the table, instead of the
work that they used to cut out, and then went and hid themselves, to
watch what the little elves would do.

About midnight in they came, dancing and skipping, hopped round the
room, and then went to sit down to their work as usual; but when they
saw the clothes lying for them, they laughed and chuckled, and seemed
mightily delighted.

Then they dressed themselves in the twinkling of an eye, and danced and
capered and sprang about, as merry as could be; till at last they danced
out at the door, and away over the green.

The good couple saw them no more; but everything went well with them
from that time forward, as long as they lived.




THE JUNIPER-TREE

Long, long ago, some two thousand years or so, there lived a rich
man with a good and beautiful wife. They loved each other dearly, but
sorrowed much that they had no children. So greatly did they desire
to have one, that the wife prayed for it day and night, but still they
remained childless.

In front of the house there was a court, in which grew a juniper-tree.
One winter’s day the wife stood under the tree to peel some apples, and
as she was peeling them, she cut her finger, and the blood fell on the
snow. ‘Ah,’ sighed the woman heavily, ‘if I had but a child, as red as
blood and as white as snow,’ and as she spoke the words, her heart grew
light within her, and it seemed to her that her wish was granted, and
she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted. A month passed,
and the snow had all disappeared; then another month went by, and all
the earth was green. So the months followed one another, and first the
trees budded in the woods, and soon the green branches grew thickly
intertwined, and then the blossoms began to fall. Once again the wife
stood under the juniper-tree, and it was so full of sweet scent that her
heart leaped for joy, and she was so overcome with her happiness, that
she fell on her knees. Presently the fruit became round and firm, and
she was glad and at peace; but when they were fully ripe she picked the
berries and ate eagerly of them, and then she grew sad and ill. A little
while later she called her husband, and said to him, weeping. ‘If I
die, bury me under the juniper-tree.’ Then she felt comforted and happy
again, and before another month had passed she had a little child, and
when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood, her joy
was so great that she died.

Her husband buried her under the juniper-tree, and wept bitterly for
her. By degrees, however, his sorrow grew less, and although at times he
still grieved over his loss, he was able to go about as usual, and later
on he married again.

He now had a little daughter born to him; the child of his first wife
was a boy, who was as red as blood and as white as snow. The mother
loved her daughter very much, and when she looked at her and then looked
at the boy, it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in
the way of her own child, and she was continually thinking how she could
get the whole of the property for her. This evil thought took possession
of her more and more, and made her behave very unkindly to the boy. She
drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings, so that the
poor child went about in fear, and had no peace from the time he left
school to the time he went back.

One day the little daughter came running to her mother in the
store-room, and said, ‘Mother, give me an apple.’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said
the wife, and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest; the chest
had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock.

‘Mother,’ said the little daughter again, ‘may not brother have one
too?’ The mother was angry at this, but she answered, ‘Yes, when he
comes out of school.’

Just then she looked out of the window and saw him coming, and it seemed
as if an evil spirit entered into her, for she snatched the apple out
of her little daughter’s hand, and said, ‘You shall not have one before
your brother.’ She threw the apple into the chest and shut it to. The
little boy now came in, and the evil spirit in the wife made her say
kindly to him, ‘My son, will you have an apple?’ but she gave him a
wicked look. ‘Mother,’ said the boy, ‘how dreadful you look! Yes, give
me an apple.’ The thought came to her that she would kill him. ‘Come
with me,’ she said, and she lifted up the lid of the chest; ‘take one
out for yourself.’ And as he bent over to do so, the evil spirit urged
her, and crash! down went the lid, and off went the little boy’s head.
Then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done.
‘If only I can prevent anyone knowing that I did it,’ she thought. So
she went upstairs to her room, and took a white handkerchief out of
her top drawer; then she set the boy’s head again on his shoulders, and
bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and placed
him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand.

Soon after this, little Marleen came up to her mother who was stirring
a pot of boiling water over the fire, and said, ‘Mother, brother is
sitting by the door with an apple in his hand, and he looks so pale;
and when I asked him to give me the apple, he did not answer, and that
frightened me.’

‘Go to him again,’ said her mother, ‘and if he does not answer, give him
a box on the ear.’ So little Marleen went, and said, ‘Brother, give me
that apple,’ but he did not say a word; then she gave him a box on the
ear, and his head rolled off. She was so terrified at this, that she ran
crying and screaming to her mother. ‘Oh!’ she said, ‘I have knocked off
brother’s head,’ and then she wept and wept, and nothing would stop her.

‘What have you done!’ said her mother, ‘but no one must know about it,
so you must keep silence; what is done can’t be undone; we will make
him into puddings.’ And she took the little boy and cut him up, made him
into puddings, and put him in the pot. But Marleen stood looking on,
and wept and wept, and her tears fell into the pot, so that there was no
need of salt.

Presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner; he asked,
‘Where is my son?’ The mother said nothing, but gave him a large dish of
black pudding, and Marleen still wept without ceasing.

The father again asked, ‘Where is my son?’

‘Oh,’ answered the wife, ‘he is gone into the country to his mother’s
great uncle; he is going to stay there some time.’

‘What has he gone there for, and he never even said goodbye to me!’

‘Well, he likes being there, and he told me he should be away quite six
weeks; he is well looked after there.’

‘I feel very unhappy about it,’ said the husband, ‘in case it should not
be all right, and he ought to have said goodbye to me.’

With this he went on with his dinner, and said, ‘Little Marleen, why do
you weep? Brother will soon be back.’ Then he asked his wife for more
pudding, and as he ate, he threw the bones under the table.

Little Marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of
her bottom drawer, and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the
table and carried them outside, and all the time she did nothing but
weep. Then she laid them in the green grass under the juniper-tree, and
she had no sooner done so, then all her sadness seemed to leave her,
and she wept no more. And now the juniper-tree began to move, and the
branches waved backwards and forwards, first away from one another, and
then together again, as it might be someone clapping their hands for
joy. After this a mist came round the tree, and in the midst of it there
was a burning as of fire, and out of the fire there flew a beautiful
bird, that rose high into the air, singing magnificently, and when it
could no more be seen, the juniper-tree stood there as before, and the
silk handkerchief and the bones were gone.

Little Marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were
still alive, and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to
the table and ate.

The bird flew away and alighted on the house of a goldsmith and began to
sing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain, when he heard the
song of the bird on his roof. He thought it so beautiful that he got
up and ran out, and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his
slippers. But he ran on into the middle of the street, with a slipper on
one foot and a sock on the other; he still had on his apron, and still
held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands, and so he stood gazing
up at the bird, while the sun came shining brightly down on the street.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing! Sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ said the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing. Give that gold
chain, and I will sing it you again.’

‘Here is the chain, take it,’ said the goldsmith. ‘Only sing me that
again.’

The bird flew down and took the gold chain in his right claw, and then
he alighted again in front of the goldsmith and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

Then he flew away, and settled on the roof of a shoemaker’s house and
sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

The shoemaker heard him, and he jumped up and ran out in his
shirt-sleeves, and stood looking up at the bird on the roof with his
hand over his eyes to keep himself from being blinded by the sun.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘how beautifully you sing!’ Then he called through the
door to his wife: ‘Wife, come out; here is a bird, come and look at it
and hear how beautifully it sings.’ Then he called his daughter and the
children, then the apprentices, girls and boys, and they all ran up the
street to look at the bird, and saw how splendid it was with its red
and green feathers, and its neck like burnished gold, and eyes like two
bright stars in its head.

‘Bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘sing me that song again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something.’

‘Wife,’ said the man, ‘go into the garret; on the upper shelf you will
see a pair of red shoes; bring them to me.’ The wife went in and fetched
the shoes.

‘There, bird,’ said the shoemaker, ‘now sing me that song again.’

The bird flew down and took the red shoes in his left claw, and then he
went back to the roof and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

When he had finished, he flew away. He had the chain in his right claw
and the shoes in his left, and he flew right away to a mill, and the
mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click clack.’ Inside the mill were
twenty of the miller’s men hewing a stone, and as they went ‘Hick hack,
hick hack, hick hack,’ the mill went ‘Click clack, click clack, click
clack.’

The bird settled on a lime-tree in front of the mill and sang:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

then one of the men left off,

  My father grieved when I was gone;

two more men left off and listened,

  My sister loved me best of all;

then four more left off,

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

now there were only eight at work,

  Underneath

And now only five,

  the juniper-tree.

And now only one,

  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

then he looked up and the last one had left off work.

‘Bird,’ he said, ‘what a beautiful song that is you sing! Let me hear it
too; sing it again.’

‘Nay,’ answered the bird, ‘I do not sing twice for nothing; give me that
millstone, and I will sing it again.’

‘If it belonged to me alone,’ said the man, ‘you should have it.’

‘Yes, yes,’ said the others: ‘if he will sing again, he can have it.’

The bird came down, and all the twenty millers set to and lifted up the
stone with a beam; then the bird put his head through the hole and took
the stone round his neck like a collar, and flew back with it to the
tree and sang--

 ‘My mother killed her little son;
  My father grieved when I was gone;
  My sister loved me best of all;
  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie
  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And when he had finished his song, he spread his wings, and with the
chain in his right claw, the shoes in his left, and the millstone round
his neck, he flew right away to his father’s house.

The father, the mother, and little Marleen were having their dinner.

‘How lighthearted I feel,’ said the father, ‘so pleased and cheerful.’

‘And I,’ said the mother, ‘I feel so uneasy, as if a heavy thunderstorm
were coming.’

But little Marleen sat and wept and wept.

Then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof.

‘I do feel so happy,’ said the father, ‘and how beautifully the sun
shines; I feel just as if I were going to see an old friend again.’

‘Ah!’ said the wife, ‘and I am so full of distress and uneasiness that
my teeth chatter, and I feel as if there were a fire in my veins,’ and
she tore open her dress; and all the while little Marleen sat in the
corner and wept, and the plate on her knees was wet with her tears.

The bird now flew to the juniper-tree and began singing:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

the mother shut her eyes and her ears, that she might see and hear
nothing, but there was a roaring sound in her ears like that of a
violent storm, and in her eyes a burning and flashing like lightning:

  My father grieved when I was gone;

‘Look, mother,’ said the man, ‘at the beautiful bird that is singing so
magnificently; and how warm and bright the sun is, and what a delicious
scent of spice in the air!’

  My sister loved me best of all;

then little Marleen laid her head down on her knees and sobbed.

‘I must go outside and see the bird nearer,’ said the man.

‘Ah, do not go!’ cried the wife. ‘I feel as if the whole house were in
flames!’

But the man went out and looked at the bird.

 She laid her kerchief over me,
 And took my bones that they might lie
 Underneath the juniper-tree
 Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

With that the bird let fall the gold chain, and it fell just round the
man’s neck, so that it fitted him exactly.

He went inside, and said, ‘See, what a splendid bird that is; he has
given me this beautiful gold chain, and looks so beautiful himself.’

But the wife was in such fear and trouble, that she fell on the floor,
and her cap fell from her head.

Then the bird began again:

 ‘My mother killed her little son;

‘Ah me!’ cried the wife, ‘if I were but a thousand feet beneath the
earth, that I might not hear that song.’

  My father grieved when I was gone;

then the woman fell down again as if dead.

  My sister loved me best of all;

‘Well,’ said little Marleen, ‘I will go out too and see if the bird will
give me anything.’

So she went out.

  She laid her kerchief over me,
  And took my bones that they might lie

and he threw down the shoes to her,

  Underneath the juniper-tree
  Kywitt, Kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!’

And she now felt quite happy and lighthearted; she put on the shoes and
danced and jumped about in them. ‘I was so miserable,’ she said, ‘when I
came out, but that has all passed away; that is indeed a splendid bird,
and he has given me a pair of red shoes.’

The wife sprang up, with her hair standing out from her head like flames
of fire. ‘Then I will go out too,’ she said, ‘and see if it will lighten
my misery, for I feel as if the world were coming to an end.’

But as she crossed the threshold, crash! the bird threw the millstone
down on her head, and she was crushed to death.

The father and little Marleen heard the sound and ran out, but they only
saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot, and when these had
passed, there stood the little brother, and he took the father and
little Marleen by the hand; then they all three rejoiced, and went
inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate.




THE TURNIP

There were two brothers who were both soldiers; the one was rich and
the other poor. The poor man thought he would try to better himself; so,
pulling off his red coat, he became a gardener, and dug his ground well,
and sowed turnips.

When the seed came up, there was one plant bigger than all the rest; and
it kept getting larger and larger, and seemed as if it would never cease
growing; so that it might have been called the prince of turnips for
there never was such a one seen before, and never will again. At last it
was so big that it filled a cart, and two oxen could hardly draw it; and
the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it, nor whether it
would be a blessing or a curse to him. One day he said to himself, ‘What
shall I do with it? if I sell it, it will bring no more than another;
and for eating, the little turnips are better than this; the best thing
perhaps is to carry it and give it to the king as a mark of respect.’

Then he yoked his oxen, and drew the turnip to the court, and gave it
to the king. ‘What a wonderful thing!’ said the king; ‘I have seen many
strange things, but such a monster as this I never saw. Where did you
get the seed? or is it only your good luck? If so, you are a true child
of fortune.’ ‘Ah, no!’ answered the gardener, ‘I am no child of fortune;
I am a poor soldier, who never could get enough to live upon; so I
laid aside my red coat, and set to work, tilling the ground. I have a
brother, who is rich, and your majesty knows him well, and all the world
knows him; but because I am poor, everybody forgets me.’

The king then took pity on him, and said, ‘You shall be poor no
longer. I will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your
brother.’ Then he gave him gold and lands and flocks, and made him so
rich that his brother’s fortune could not at all be compared with his.

When the brother heard of all this, and how a turnip had made the
gardener so rich, he envied him sorely, and bethought himself how he
could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself. However, he
determined to manage more cleverly than his brother, and got together a
rich present of gold and fine horses for the king; and thought he must
have a much larger gift in return; for if his brother had received so
much for only a turnip, what must his present be worth?

The king took the gift very graciously, and said he knew not what to
give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip; so
the soldier was forced to put it into a cart, and drag it home with him.
When he reached home, he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite;
and at length wicked thoughts came into his head, and he resolved to
kill his brother.

So he hired some villains to murder him; and having shown them where to
lie in ambush, he went to his brother, and said, ‘Dear brother, I have
found a hidden treasure; let us go and dig it up, and share it between
us.’ The other had no suspicions of his roguery: so they went out
together, and as they were travelling along, the murderers rushed out
upon him, bound him, and were going to hang him on a tree.

But whilst they were getting all ready, they heard the trampling of a
horse at a distance, which so frightened them that they pushed their
prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack, and swung him up by a
cord to the tree, where they left him dangling, and ran away. Meantime
he worked and worked away, till he made a hole large enough to put out
his head.

When the horseman came up, he proved to be a student, a merry fellow,
who was journeying along on his nag, and singing as he went. As soon as
the man in the sack saw him passing under the tree, he cried out, ‘Good
morning! good morning to thee, my friend!’ The student looked about
everywhere; and seeing no one, and not knowing where the voice came
from, cried out, ‘Who calls me?’

Then the man in the tree answered, ‘Lift up thine eyes, for behold here
I sit in the sack of wisdom; here have I, in a short time, learned great
and wondrous things. Compared to this seat, all the learning of the
schools is as empty air. A little longer, and I shall know all that man
can know, and shall come forth wiser than the wisest of mankind. Here
I discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars; the laws
that control the winds; the number of the sands on the seashore; the
healing of the sick; the virtues of all simples, of birds, and of
precious stones. Wert thou but once here, my friend, though wouldst feel
and own the power of knowledge.

The student listened to all this and wondered much; at last he said,
‘Blessed be the day and hour when I found you; cannot you contrive to
let me into the sack for a little while?’ Then the other answered, as if
very unwillingly, ‘A little space I may allow thee to sit here, if thou
wilt reward me well and entreat me kindly; but thou must tarry yet an
hour below, till I have learnt some little matters that are yet unknown
to me.’

So the student sat himself down and waited a while; but the time hung
heavy upon him, and he begged earnestly that he might ascend forthwith,
for his thirst for knowledge was great. Then the other pretended to give
way, and said, ‘Thou must let the sack of wisdom descend, by untying
yonder cord, and then thou shalt enter.’ So the student let him down,
opened the sack, and set him free. ‘Now then,’ cried he, ‘let me ascend
quickly.’ As he began to put himself into the sack heels first, ‘Wait a
while,’ said the gardener, ‘that is not the way.’ Then he pushed him
in head first, tied up the sack, and soon swung up the searcher after
wisdom dangling in the air. ‘How is it with thee, friend?’ said he,
‘dost thou not feel that wisdom comes unto thee? Rest there in peace,
till thou art a wiser man than thou wert.’

So saying, he trotted off on the student’s nag, and left the poor fellow
to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down.




CLEVER HANS

The mother of Hans said: ‘Whither away, Hans?’ Hans answered: ‘To
Gretel.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh, I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’
‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day,
Hans. What do you bring that is good?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want to have
something given me.’ Gretel presents Hans with a needle, Hans says:
‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart
home. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’
‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing; had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a needle.’ ‘Where is the
needle, Hans?’ ‘Stuck in the hay-cart.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans. You
should have stuck the needle in your sleeve.’ ‘Never mind, I’ll do
better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is
good?’ ‘I bring nothing. I want to have something given to me.’ Gretel
presents Hans with a knife. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans
takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home. ‘Good evening,
mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ What
did you take her?’ ‘Took her nothing, she gave me something.’ ‘What did
Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a knife.’ ‘Where is the knife, Hans?’ ‘Stuck
in my sleeve.’ ‘That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in
your pocket.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a young goat. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans takes
the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he gets home it
is suffocated. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have
you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘Took nothing, she
gave me something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me a goat.’
‘Where is the goat, Hans?’ ‘Put it in my pocket.’ ‘That was ill done,
Hans, you should have put a rope round the goat’s neck.’ ‘Never mind,
will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘Oh,
I’ll behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to
Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good thing do you
bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, I want something given me.’ Gretel presents
Hans with a piece of bacon. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away behind him.
The dogs come and devour the bacon. When he gets home, he has the rope
in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging on to it. ‘Good
evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took her nothing, she gave me
something.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘Gave me a bit of bacon.’ ‘Where
is the bacon, Hans?’ ‘I tied it to a rope, brought it home, dogs took
it.’ ‘That was ill done, Hans, you should have carried the bacon on your
head.’ ‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’ Hans comes to Gretel.
‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans, What good thing do you bring?’ ‘I
bring nothing, but would have something given.’ Gretel presents Hans
with a calf. ‘Goodbye, Gretel.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his face.
‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With
Gretel.’ ‘What did you take her?’ ‘I took nothing, but had something
given me.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘A calf.’ ‘Where have you the
calf, Hans?’ ‘I set it on my head and it kicked my face.’ ‘That was
ill done, Hans, you should have led the calf, and put it in the stall.’
‘Never mind, will do better next time.’

‘Whither away, Hans?’ ‘To Gretel, mother.’ ‘Behave well, Hans.’ ‘I’ll
behave well. Goodbye, mother.’ ‘Goodbye, Hans.’

Hans comes to Gretel. ‘Good day, Gretel.’ ‘Good day, Hans. What good
thing do you bring?’ ‘I bring nothing, but would have something given.’
Gretel says to Hans: ‘I will go with you.’

Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and binds
her fast. Then Hans goes to his mother. ‘Good evening, mother.’ ‘Good
evening, Hans. Where have you been?’ ‘With Gretel.’ ‘What did you take
her?’ ‘I took her nothing.’ ‘What did Gretel give you?’ ‘She gave me
nothing, she came with me.’ ‘Where have you left Gretel?’ ‘I led her by
the rope, tied her to the rack, and scattered some grass for her.’ ‘That
was ill done, Hans, you should have cast friendly eyes on her.’ ‘Never
mind, will do better.’

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves’ and sheep’s eyes,
and threw them in Gretel’s face. Then Gretel became angry, tore herself
loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.




THE THREE LANGUAGES

An aged count once lived in Switzerland, who had an only son, but he
was stupid, and could learn nothing. Then said the father: ‘Hark you,
my son, try as I will I can get nothing into your head. You must go from
hence, I will give you into the care of a celebrated master, who shall
see what he can do with you.’ The youth was sent into a strange town,
and remained a whole year with the master. At the end of this time,
he came home again, and his father asked: ‘Now, my son, what have you
learnt?’ ‘Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.’ ‘Lord
have mercy on us!’ cried the father; ‘is that all you have learnt? I
will send you into another town, to another master.’ The youth was taken
thither, and stayed a year with this master likewise. When he came back
the father again asked: ‘My son, what have you learnt?’ He answered:
‘Father, I have learnt what the birds say.’ Then the father fell into a
rage and said: ‘Oh, you lost man, you have spent the precious time and
learnt nothing; are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes? I will
send you to a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also, I
will no longer be your father.’ The youth remained a whole year with the
third master also, and when he came home again, and his father inquired:
‘My son, what have you learnt?’ he answered: ‘Dear father, I have this
year learnt what the frogs croak.’ Then the father fell into the most
furious anger, sprang up, called his people thither, and said: ‘This man
is no longer my son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him
out into the forest, and kill him.’ They took him forth, but when they
should have killed him, they could not do it for pity, and let him go,
and they cut the eyes and tongue out of a deer that they might carry
them to the old man as a token.

The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortress where he
begged for a night’s lodging. ‘Yes,’ said the lord of the castle, ‘if
you will pass the night down there in the old tower, go thither; but I
warn you, it is at the peril of your life, for it is full of wild dogs,
which bark and howl without stopping, and at certain hours a man has to
be given to them, whom they at once devour.’ The whole district was in
sorrow and dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anything to
stop this. The youth, however, was without fear, and said: ‘Just let me
go down to the barking dogs, and give me something that I can throw to
them; they will do nothing to harm me.’ As he himself would have it so,
they gave him some food for the wild animals, and led him down to the
tower. When he went inside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged
their tails quite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and
did not hurt one hair of his head. Next morning, to the astonishment of
everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and said to the lord of
the castle: ‘The dogs have revealed to me, in their own language, why
they dwell there, and bring evil on the land. They are bewitched, and
are obliged to watch over a great treasure which is below in the tower,
and they can have no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise
learnt, from their discourse, how that is to be done.’ Then all who
heard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he would adopt him
as a son if he accomplished it successfully. He went down again, and
as he knew what he had to do, he did it thoroughly, and brought a chest
full of gold out with him. The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth
heard no more; they had disappeared, and the country was freed from the
trouble.

After some time he took it in his head that he would travel to Rome. On
the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number of frogs were sitting
croaking. He listened to them, and when he became aware of what they
were saying, he grew very thoughtful and sad. At last he arrived in
Rome, where the Pope had just died, and there was great doubt among
the cardinals as to whom they should appoint as his successor. They at
length agreed that the person should be chosen as pope who should be
distinguished by some divine and miraculous token. And just as that was
decided on, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly two
snow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sitting there. The
ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above, and asked him on
the spot if he would be pope. He was undecided, and knew not if he were
worthy of this, but the doves counselled him to do it, and at length he
said yes. Then was he anointed and consecrated, and thus was fulfilled
what he had heard from the frogs on his way, which had so affected him,
that he was to be his Holiness the Pope. Then he had to sing a mass, and
did not know one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on his
shoulders, and said it all in his ear.




THE FOX AND THE CAT

It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as she thought to
herself: ‘He is clever and full of experience, and much esteemed in the
world,’ she spoke to him in a friendly way. ‘Good day, dear Mr Fox,
how are you? How is all with you? How are you getting on in these hard
times?’ The fox, full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from
head to foot, and for a long time did not know whether he would give
any answer or not. At last he said: ‘Oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you
piebald fool, you hungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of? Have
you the cheek to ask how I am getting on? What have you learnt? How
many arts do you understand?’ ‘I understand but one,’ replied the
cat, modestly. ‘What art is that?’ asked the fox. ‘When the hounds are
following me, I can spring into a tree and save myself.’ ‘Is that all?’
said the fox. ‘I am master of a hundred arts, and have into the bargain
a sackful of cunning. You make me sorry for you; come with me, I will
teach you how people get away from the hounds.’ Just then came a hunter
with four dogs. The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and sat down at the top
of it, where the branches and foliage quite concealed her. ‘Open your
sack, Mr Fox, open your sack,’ cried the cat to him, but the dogs had
already seized him, and were holding him fast. ‘Ah, Mr Fox,’ cried the
cat. ‘You with your hundred arts are left in the lurch! Had you been
able to climb like me, you would not have lost your life.’




THE FOUR CLEVER BROTHERS

‘Dear children,’ said a poor man to his four sons, ‘I have nothing to
give you; you must go out into the wide world and try your luck. Begin
by learning some craft or another, and see how you can get on.’ So the
four brothers took their walking-sticks in their hands, and their little
bundles on their shoulders, and after bidding their father goodbye, went
all out at the gate together. When they had got on some way they came
to four crossways, each leading to a different country. Then the eldest
said, ‘Here we must part; but this day four years we will come back
to this spot, and in the meantime each must try what he can do for
himself.’

So each brother went his way; and as the eldest was hastening on a man
met him, and asked him where he was going, and what he wanted. ‘I am
going to try my luck in the world, and should like to begin by learning
some art or trade,’ answered he. ‘Then,’ said the man, ‘go with me, and
I will teach you to become the cunningest thief that ever was.’ ‘No,’
said the other, ‘that is not an honest calling, and what can one look
to earn by it in the end but the gallows?’ ‘Oh!’ said the man, ‘you need
not fear the gallows; for I will only teach you to steal what will be
fair game: I meddle with nothing but what no one else can get or care
anything about, and where no one can find you out.’ So the young man
agreed to follow his trade, and he soon showed himself so clever, that
nothing could escape him that he had once set his mind upon.

The second brother also met a man, who, when he found out what he was
setting out upon, asked him what craft he meant to follow. ‘I do not
know yet,’ said he. ‘Then come with me, and be a star-gazer. It is a
noble art, for nothing can be hidden from you, when once you understand
the stars.’ The plan pleased him much, and he soon became such a skilful
star-gazer, that when he had served out his time, and wanted to leave
his master, he gave him a glass, and said, ‘With this you can see all
that is passing in the sky and on earth, and nothing can be hidden from
you.’

The third brother met a huntsman, who took him with him, and taught him
so well all that belonged to hunting, that he became very clever in the
craft of the woods; and when he left his master he gave him a bow, and
said, ‘Whatever you shoot at with this bow you will be sure to hit.’

The youngest brother likewise met a man who asked him what he wished to
do. ‘Would not you like,’ said he, ‘to be a tailor?’ ‘Oh, no!’ said
the young man; ‘sitting cross-legged from morning to night, working
backwards and forwards with a needle and goose, will never suit me.’
‘Oh!’ answered the man, ‘that is not my sort of tailoring; come with me,
and you will learn quite another kind of craft from that.’ Not knowing
what better to do, he came into the plan, and learnt tailoring from the
beginning; and when he left his master, he gave him a needle, and said,
‘You can sew anything with this, be it as soft as an egg or as hard as
steel; and the joint will be so fine that no seam will be seen.’

After the space of four years, at the time agreed upon, the four
brothers met at the four cross-roads; and having welcomed each other,
set off towards their father’s home, where they told him all that had
happened to them, and how each had learned some craft.

Then, one day, as they were sitting before the house under a very high
tree, the father said, ‘I should like to try what each of you can do in
this way.’ So he looked up, and said to the second son, ‘At the top of
this tree there is a chaffinch’s nest; tell me how many eggs there are
in it.’ The star-gazer took his glass, looked up, and said, ‘Five.’
‘Now,’ said the father to the eldest son, ‘take away the eggs without
letting the bird that is sitting upon them and hatching them know
anything of what you are doing.’ So the cunning thief climbed up the
tree, and brought away to his father the five eggs from under the bird;
and it never saw or felt what he was doing, but kept sitting on at its
ease. Then the father took the eggs, and put one on each corner of the
table, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, ‘Cut all
the eggs in two pieces at one shot.’ The huntsman took up his bow, and
at one shot struck all the five eggs as his father wished.

‘Now comes your turn,’ said he to the young tailor; ‘sew the eggs and
the young birds in them together again, so neatly that the shot shall
have done them no harm.’ Then the tailor took his needle, and sewed the
eggs as he was told; and when he had done, the thief was sent to take
them back to the nest, and put them under the bird without its knowing
it. Then she went on sitting, and hatched them: and in a few days they
crawled out, and had only a little red streak across their necks, where
the tailor had sewn them together.

‘Well done, sons!’ said the old man; ‘you have made good use of your
time, and learnt something worth the knowing; but I am sure I do not
know which ought to have the prize. Oh, that a time might soon come for
you to turn your skill to some account!’

Not long after this there was a great bustle in the country; for the
king’s daughter had been carried off by a mighty dragon, and the king
mourned over his loss day and night, and made it known that whoever
brought her back to him should have her for a wife. Then the four
brothers said to each other, ‘Here is a chance for us; let us try
what we can do.’ And they agreed to see whether they could not set the
princess free. ‘I will soon find out where she is, however,’ said the
star-gazer, as he looked through his glass; and he soon cried out, ‘I
see her afar off, sitting upon a rock in the sea, and I can spy the
dragon close by, guarding her.’ Then he went to the king, and asked for
a ship for himself and his brothers; and they sailed together over the
sea, till they came to the right place. There they found the princess
sitting, as the star-gazer had said, on the rock; and the dragon was
lying asleep, with his head upon her lap. ‘I dare not shoot at him,’
said the huntsman, ‘for I should kill the beautiful young lady also.’
‘Then I will try my skill,’ said the thief, and went and stole her away
from under the dragon, so quietly and gently that the beast did not know
it, but went on snoring.

Then away they hastened with her full of joy in their boat towards the
ship; but soon came the dragon roaring behind them through the air; for
he awoke and missed the princess. But when he got over the boat, and
wanted to pounce upon them and carry off the princess, the huntsman took
up his bow and shot him straight through the heart so that he fell down
dead. They were still not safe; for he was such a great beast that in
his fall he overset the boat, and they had to swim in the open sea
upon a few planks. So the tailor took his needle, and with a few large
stitches put some of the planks together; and he sat down upon these,
and sailed about and gathered up all pieces of the boat; and then tacked
them together so quickly that the boat was soon ready, and they then
reached the ship and got home safe.

When they had brought home the princess to her father, there was great
rejoicing; and he said to the four brothers, ‘One of you shall marry
her, but you must settle amongst yourselves which it is to be.’ Then
there arose a quarrel between them; and the star-gazer said, ‘If I had
not found the princess out, all your skill would have been of no use;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘Your seeing her would have been of
no use,’ said the thief, ‘if I had not taken her away from the dragon;
therefore she ought to be mine.’ ‘No, she is mine,’ said the huntsman;
‘for if I had not killed the dragon, he would, after all, have torn you
and the princess into pieces.’ ‘And if I had not sewn the boat together
again,’ said the tailor, ‘you would all have been drowned, therefore she
is mine.’ Then the king put in a word, and said, ‘Each of you is right;
and as all cannot have the young lady, the best way is for neither of
you to have her: for the truth is, there is somebody she likes a great
deal better. But to make up for your loss, I will give each of you, as a
reward for his skill, half a kingdom.’ So the brothers agreed that this
plan would be much better than either quarrelling or marrying a lady who
had no mind to have them. And the king then gave to each half a kingdom,
as he had said; and they lived very happily the rest of their days, and
took good care of their father; and somebody took better care of the
young lady, than to let either the dragon or one of the craftsmen have
her again.




LILY AND THE LION

A merchant, who had three daughters, was once setting out upon a
journey; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should
bring back for her. The eldest wished for pearls; the second for jewels;
but the third, who was called Lily, said, ‘Dear father, bring me a
rose.’ Now it was no easy task to find a rose, for it was the middle
of winter; yet as she was his prettiest daughter, and was very fond of
flowers, her father said he would try what he could do. So he kissed all
three, and bid them goodbye.

And when the time came for him to go home, he had bought pearls and
jewels for the two eldest, but he had sought everywhere in vain for the
rose; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing, the
people laughed at him, and asked him whether he thought roses grew in
snow. This grieved him very much, for Lily was his dearest child; and as
he was journeying home, thinking what he should bring her, he came to a
fine castle; and around the castle was a garden, in one half of which it
seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter. On one side the
finest flowers were in full bloom, and on the other everything looked
dreary and buried in the snow. ‘A lucky hit!’ said he, as he called to
his servant, and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was
there, and bring him away one of the finest flowers.

This done, they were riding away well pleased, when up sprang a fierce
lion, and roared out, ‘Whoever has stolen my roses shall be eaten up
alive!’ Then the man said, ‘I knew not that the garden belonged to you;
can nothing save my life?’ ‘No!’ said the lion, ‘nothing, unless you
undertake to give me whatever meets you on your return home; if you
agree to this, I will give you your life, and the rose too for your
daughter.’ But the man was unwilling to do so and said, ‘It may be my
youngest daughter, who loves me most, and always runs to meet me when
I go home.’ Then the servant was greatly frightened, and said, ‘It may
perhaps be only a cat or a dog.’ And at last the man yielded with a
heavy heart, and took the rose; and said he would give the lion whatever
should meet him first on his return.

And as he came near home, it was Lily, his youngest and dearest
daughter, that met him; she came running, and kissed him, and welcomed
him home; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose, she was
still more glad. But her father began to be very sorrowful, and to weep,
saying, ‘Alas, my dearest child! I have bought this flower at a high
price, for I have said I would give you to a wild lion; and when he has
you, he will tear you in pieces, and eat you.’ Then he told her all that
had happened, and said she should not go, let what would happen.

But she comforted him, and said, ‘Dear father, the word you have given
must be kept; I will go to the lion, and soothe him: perhaps he will let
me come safe home again.’

The next morning she asked the way she was to go, and took leave of her
father, and went forth with a bold heart into the wood. But the lion was
an enchanted prince. By day he and all his court were lions, but in the
evening they took their right forms again. And when Lily came to the
castle, he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him. The
wedding-feast was held, and they lived happily together a long time. The
prince was only to be seen as soon as evening came, and then he held his
court; but every morning he left his bride, and went away by himself,
she knew not whither, till the night came again.

After some time he said to her, ‘Tomorrow there will be a great feast in
your father’s house, for your eldest sister is to be married; and if
you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither.’ Then she
rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more, and set
out with the lions; and everyone was overjoyed to see her, for they had
thought her dead long since. But she told them how happy she was, and
stayed till the feast was over, and then went back to the wood.

Her second sister was soon after married, and when Lily was asked to
go to the wedding, she said to the prince, ‘I will not go alone this
time--you must go with me.’ But he would not, and said that it would be
a very hazardous thing; for if the least ray of the torch-light should
fall upon him his enchantment would become still worse, for he should be
changed into a dove, and be forced to wander about the world for seven
long years. However, she gave him no rest, and said she would take care
no light should fall upon him. So at last they set out together, and
took with them their little child; and she chose a large hall with thick
walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted; but,
unluckily, no one saw that there was a crack in the door. Then the
wedding was held with great pomp, but as the train came from the church,
and passed with the torches before the hall, a very small ray of light
fell upon the prince. In a moment he disappeared, and when his wife came
in and looked for him, she found only a white dove; and it said to her,
‘Seven years must I fly up and down over the face of the earth, but
every now and then I will let fall a white feather, that will show you
the way I am going; follow it, and at last you may overtake and set me
free.’

This said, he flew out at the door, and poor Lily followed; and every
now and then a white feather fell, and showed her the way she was to
journey. Thus she went roving on through the wide world, and looked
neither to the right hand nor to the left, nor took any rest, for seven
years. Then she began to be glad, and thought to herself that the time
was fast coming when all her troubles should end; yet repose was still
far off, for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white
feather, and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove.
‘Now,’ thought she to herself, ‘no aid of man can be of use to me.’ So
she went to the sun and said, ‘Thou shinest everywhere, on the hill’s
top and the valley’s depth--hast thou anywhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the sun, ‘I have not seen it; but I will give thee a
casket--open it when thy hour of need comes.’

So she thanked the sun, and went on her way till eventide; and when
the moon arose, she cried unto it, and said, ‘Thou shinest through the
night, over field and grove--hast thou nowhere seen my white dove?’
‘No,’ said the moon, ‘I cannot help thee but I will give thee an
egg--break it when need comes.’

Then she thanked the moon, and went on till the night-wind blew; and she
raised up her voice to it, and said, ‘Thou blowest through every tree
and under every leaf--hast thou not seen my white dove?’ ‘No,’ said the
night-wind, ‘but I will ask three other winds; perhaps they have seen
it.’ Then the east wind and the west wind came, and said they too had
not seen it, but the south wind said, ‘I have seen the white dove--he
has fled to the Red Sea, and is changed once more into a lion, for the
seven years are passed away, and there he is fighting with a dragon;
and the dragon is an enchanted princess, who seeks to separate him from
you.’ Then the night-wind said, ‘I will give thee counsel. Go to the
Red Sea; on the right shore stand many rods--count them, and when thou
comest to the eleventh, break it off, and smite the dragon with it; and
so the lion will have the victory, and both of them will appear to you
in their own forms. Then look round and thou wilt see a griffin, winged
like bird, sitting by the Red Sea; jump on to his back with thy beloved
one as quickly as possible, and he will carry you over the waters to
your home. I will also give thee this nut,’ continued the night-wind.
‘When you are half-way over, throw it down, and out of the waters will
immediately spring up a high nut-tree on which the griffin will be able
to rest, otherwise he would not have the strength to bear you the whole
way; if, therefore, thou dost forget to throw down the nut, he will let
you both fall into the sea.’

So our poor wanderer went forth, and found all as the night-wind had
said; and she plucked the eleventh rod, and smote the dragon, and the
lion forthwith became a prince, and the dragon a princess again. But
no sooner was the princess released from the spell, than she seized
the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin’s back, and went off
carrying the prince away with her.

Thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn; but she
took heart and said, ‘As far as the wind blows, and so long as the cock
crows, I will journey on, till I find him once again.’ She went on for
a long, long way, till at length she came to the castle whither the
princess had carried the prince; and there was a feast got ready, and
she heard that the wedding was about to be held. ‘Heaven aid me now!’
said she; and she took the casket that the sun had given her, and found
that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself. So she put it
on, and went into the palace, and all the people gazed upon her; and
the dress pleased the bride so much that she asked whether it was to be
sold. ‘Not for gold and silver.’ said she, ‘but for flesh and blood.’
The princess asked what she meant, and she said, ‘Let me speak with the
bridegroom this night in his chamber, and I will give thee the dress.’
At last the princess agreed, but she told her chamberlain to give the
prince a sleeping draught, that he might not hear or see her. When
evening came, and the prince had fallen asleep, she was led into
his chamber, and she sat herself down at his feet, and said: ‘I have
followed thee seven years. I have been to the sun, the moon, and the
night-wind, to seek thee, and at last I have helped thee to overcome
the dragon. Wilt thou then forget me quite?’ But the prince all the time
slept so soundly, that her voice only passed over him, and seemed like
the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees.

Then poor Lily was led away, and forced to give up the golden dress; and
when she saw that there was no help for her, she went out into a meadow,
and sat herself down and wept. But as she sat she bethought herself of
the egg that the moon had given her; and when she broke it, there ran
out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold, that played about, and then
nestled under the old one’s wings, so as to form the most beautiful
sight in the world. And she rose up and drove them before her, till the
bride saw them from her window, and was so pleased that she came forth
and asked her if she would sell the brood. ‘Not for gold or silver, but
for flesh and blood: let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom
in his chamber, and I will give thee the whole brood.’

Then the princess thought to betray her as before, and agreed to
what she asked: but when the prince went to his chamber he asked
the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night. And the
chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught, and
how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber, and was
to come again that night. Then the prince took care to throw away the
sleeping draught; and when Lily came and began again to tell him what
woes had befallen her, and how faithful and true to him she had been,
he knew his beloved wife’s voice, and sprang up, and said, ‘You have
awakened me as from a dream, for the strange princess had thrown a spell
around me, so that I had altogether forgotten you; but Heaven hath sent
you to me in a lucky hour.’

And they stole away out of the palace by night unawares, and seated
themselves on the griffin, who flew back with them over the Red Sea.
When they were half-way across Lily let the nut fall into the water,
and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea, whereon the griffin
rested for a while, and then carried them safely home. There they found
their child, now grown up to be comely and fair; and after all their
troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days.




THE FOX AND THE HORSE

A farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to
him: but he was now grown too old to work; so the farmer would give him
nothing more to eat, and said, ‘I want you no longer, so take yourself
off out of my stable; I shall not take you back again until you are
stronger than a lion.’ Then he opened the door and turned him adrift.

The poor horse was very melancholy, and wandered up and down in the
wood, seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain. Presently
a fox met him: ‘What’s the matter, my friend?’ said he, ‘why do you hang
down your head and look so lonely and woe-begone?’ ‘Ah!’ replied the
horse, ‘justice and avarice never dwell in one house; my master has
forgotten all that I have done for him so many years, and because I
can no longer work he has turned me adrift, and says unless I become
stronger than a lion he will not take me back again; what chance can I
have of that? he knows I have none, or he would not talk so.’

However, the fox bid him be of good cheer, and said, ‘I will help you;
lie down there, stretch yourself out quite stiff, and pretend to be
dead.’ The horse did as he was told, and the fox went straight to the
lion who lived in a cave close by, and said to him, ‘A little way off
lies a dead horse; come with me and you may make an excellent meal of
his carcase.’ The lion was greatly pleased, and set off immediately; and
when they came to the horse, the fox said, ‘You will not be able to eat
him comfortably here; I’ll tell you what--I will tie you fast to
his tail, and then you can draw him to your den, and eat him at your
leisure.’

This advice pleased the lion, so he laid himself down quietly for the
fox to make him fast to the horse. But the fox managed to tie his legs
together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he
could not set himself free. When the work was done, the fox clapped the
horse on the shoulder, and said, ‘Jip! Dobbin! Jip!’ Then up he sprang,
and moved off, dragging the lion behind him. The beast began to roar
and bellow, till all the birds of the wood flew away for fright; but the
horse let him sing on, and made his way quietly over the fields to his
master’s house.

‘Here he is, master,’ said he, ‘I have got the better of him’: and when
the farmer saw his old servant, his heart relented, and he said. ‘Thou
shalt stay in thy stable and be well taken care of.’ And so the poor old
horse had plenty to eat, and lived--till he died.




THE BLUE LIGHT

There was once upon a time a soldier who for many years had served the
king faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve no longer
because of the many wounds which he had received. The king said to him:
‘You may return to your home, I need you no longer, and you will not
receive any more money, for he only receives wages who renders me
service for them.’ Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living,
went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the
evening he entered a forest. When darkness came on, he saw a light,
which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived a witch. ‘Do give
me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,’ said he to
her, ‘or I shall starve.’ ‘Oho!’ she answered, ‘who gives anything to a
run-away soldier? Yet will I be compassionate, and take you in, if you
will do what I wish.’ ‘What do you wish?’ said the soldier. ‘That you
should dig all round my garden for me, tomorrow.’ The soldier consented,
and next day laboured with all his strength, but could not finish it by
the evening. ‘I see well enough,’ said the witch, ‘that you can do no
more today, but I will keep you yet another night, in payment for
which you must tomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small.’ The
soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witch
proposed that he should stay one night more. ‘Tomorrow, you shall only
do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an old
dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, and never goes
out, and you shall bring it up again.’ Next day the old woman took him
to the well, and let him down in a basket. He found the blue light, and
made her a signal to draw him up again. She did draw him up, but when he
came near the edge, she stretched down her hand and wanted to take the
blue light away from him. ‘No,’ said he, perceiving her evil intention,
‘I will not give you the light until I am standing with both feet upon
the ground.’ The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the
well, and went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the blue
light went on burning, but of what use was that to him? He saw very well
that he could not escape death. He sat for a while very sorrowfully,
then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his tobacco pipe, which
was still half full. ‘This shall be my last pleasure,’ thought he,
pulled it out, lit it at the blue light and began to smoke. When the
smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little black dwarf stood
before him, and said: ‘Lord, what are your commands?’ ‘What my commands
are?’ replied the soldier, quite astonished. ‘I must do everything you
bid me,’ said the little man. ‘Good,’ said the soldier; ‘then in the
first place help me out of this well.’ The little man took him by the
hand, and led him through an underground passage, but he did not forget
to take the blue light with him. On the way the dwarf showed him the
treasures which the witch had collected and hidden there, and the
soldier took as much gold as he could carry. When he was above, he said
to the little man: ‘Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before
the judge.’ In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild
tom-cat and screaming frightfully. Nor was it long before the little man
reappeared. ‘It is all done,’ said he, ‘and the witch is already hanging
on the gallows. What further commands has my lord?’ inquired the dwarf.
‘At this moment, none,’ answered the soldier; ‘you can return home, only
be at hand immediately, if I summon you.’ ‘Nothing more is needed than
that you should light your pipe at the blue light, and I will appear
before you at once.’ Thereupon he vanished from his sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he came. He went to the
best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord
furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it was ready and the
soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned the little black manikin
and said: ‘I have served the king faithfully, but he has dismissed me,
and left me to hunger, and now I want to take my revenge.’ ‘What am I to
do?’ asked the little man. ‘Late at night, when the king’s daughter is
in bed, bring her here in her sleep, she shall do servant’s work for
me.’ The manikin said: ‘That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very
dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.’
When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the manikin
carried in the princess. ‘Aha! are you there?’ cried the soldier, ‘get
to your work at once! Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.’ When
she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he
stretched out his feet and said: ‘Pull off my boots,’ and then he
threw them in her face, and made her pick them up again, and clean
and brighten them. She, however, did everything he bade her, without
opposition, silently and with half-shut eyes. When the first cock
crowed, the manikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her
in her bed.

Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream. ‘I was carried through the
streets with the rapidity of lightning,’ said she, ‘and taken into a
soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his
room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a
dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.’
‘The dream may have been true,’ said the king. ‘I will give you a piece
of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in the
pocket, and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and
leave a track in the streets.’ But unseen by the king, the manikin was
standing beside him when he said that, and heard all. At night when
the sleeping princess was again carried through the streets, some peas
certainly did fall out of her pocket, but they made no track, for the
crafty manikin had just before scattered peas in every street there
was. And again the princess was compelled to do servant’s work until
cock-crow.

Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but it was
all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting, picking up
peas, and saying: ‘It must have rained peas, last night.’ ‘We must think
of something else,’ said the king; ‘keep your shoes on when you go to
bed, and before you come back from the place where you are taken, hide
one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it.’ The black manikin
heard this plot, and at night when the soldier again ordered him to
bring the princess, revealed it to him, and told him that he knew of no
expedient to counteract this stratagem, and that if the shoe were found
in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him. ‘Do what I bid you,’
replied the soldier, and again this third night the princess was obliged
to work like a servant, but before she went away, she hid her shoe under
the bed.

Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter’s
shoe. It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at the
entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon brought back,
and thrown into prison. In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable
things he had, the blue light and the gold, and had only one ducat in
his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of
his dungeon, when he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by. The
soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up, said to
him: ‘Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have left lying in
the inn, and I will give you a ducat for doing it.’ His comrade ran
thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the soldier was alone
again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the black manikin. ‘Have no
fear,’ said the latter to his master. ‘Go wheresoever they take you, and
let them do what they will, only take the blue light with you.’ Next day
the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked, the judge
condemned him to death. When he was led forth to die, he begged a last
favour of the king. ‘What is it?’ asked the king. ‘That I may smoke one
more pipe on my way.’ ‘You may smoke three,’ answered the king, ‘but do
not imagine that I will spare your life.’ Then the soldier pulled out
his pipe and lighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths
of smoke had ascended, the manikin was there with a small cudgel in his
hand, and said: ‘What does my lord command?’ ‘Strike down to earth that
false judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who has
treated me so ill.’ Then the manikin fell on them like lightning,
darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touched by
his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again. The king
was terrified; he threw himself on the soldier’s mercy, and merely to
be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for his own, and his
daughter to wife.




THE RAVEN

There was once a queen who had a little daughter, still too young to run
alone. One day the child was very troublesome, and the mother could not
quiet it, do what she would. She grew impatient, and seeing the ravens
flying round the castle, she opened the window, and said: ‘I wish you
were a raven and would fly away, then I should have a little peace.’
Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, when the child in her arms was
turned into a raven, and flew away from her through the open window. The
bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time,
and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child.

Long after this, a man was making his way through the wood when he heard
a raven calling, and he followed the sound of the voice. As he drew
near, the raven said, ‘I am by birth a king’s daughter, but am now under
the spell of some enchantment; you can, however, set me free.’ ‘What
am I to do?’ he asked. She replied, ‘Go farther into the wood until you
come to a house, wherein lives an old woman; she will offer you food and
drink, but you must not take of either; if you do, you will fall into
a deep sleep, and will not be able to help me. In the garden behind the
house is a large tan-heap, and on that you must stand and watch for me.
I shall drive there in my carriage at two o’clock in the afternoon for
three successive days; the first day it will be drawn by four white, the
second by four chestnut, and the last by four black horses; but if you
fail to keep awake and I find you sleeping, I shall not be set free.’

The man promised to do all that she wished, but the raven said, ‘Alas! I
know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable
to save me.’ The man assured her again that he would on no account touch
a thing to eat or drink.

When he came to the house and went inside, the old woman met him, and
said, ‘Poor man! how tired you are! Come in and rest and let me give you
something to eat and drink.’

‘No,’ answered the man, ‘I will neither eat not drink.’

But she would not leave him alone, and urged him saying, ‘If you will
not eat anything, at least you might take a draught of wine; one drink
counts for nothing,’ and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded, and
drank.

As it drew towards the appointed hour, he went outside into the garden
and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven. Suddenly a feeling of
fatigue came over him, and unable to resist it, he lay down for a little
while, fully determined, however, to keep awake; but in another minute
his eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell into such a deep sleep,
that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him. At two
o’clock the raven came driving along, drawn by her four white horses;
but even before she reached the spot, she said to herself, sighing, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep.’ When she entered the garden, there she found
him as she had feared, lying on the tan-heap, fast asleep. She got out
of her carriage and went to him; she called him and shook him, but it
was all in vain, he still continued sleeping.

The next day at noon, the old woman came to him again with food and
drink which he at first refused. At last, overcome by her persistent
entreaties that he would take something, he lifted the glass and drank
again.

Towards two o’clock he went into the garden and on to the tan-heap to
watch for the raven. He had not been there long before he began to feel
so tired that his limbs seemed hardly able to support him, and he could
not stand upright any longer; so again he lay down and fell fast asleep.
As the raven drove along her four chestnut horses, she said sorrowfully
to herself, ‘I know he has fallen asleep.’ She went as before to look
for him, but he slept, and it was impossible to awaken him.

The following day the old woman said to him, ‘What is this? You are not
eating or drinking anything, do you want to kill yourself?’

He answered, ‘I may not and will not either eat or drink.’

But she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him,
and when he smelt the wine, he was unable to resist the temptation, and
took a deep draught.

When the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in
the garden to await the king’s daughter, but he felt even more overcome
with weariness than on the two previous days, and throwing himself down,
he slept like a log. At two o’clock the raven could be seen approaching,
and this time her coachman and everything about her, as well as her
horses, were black.

She was sadder than ever as she drove along, and said mournfully, ‘I
know he has fallen asleep, and will not be able to set me free.’ She
found him sleeping heavily, and all her efforts to awaken him were of no
avail. Then she placed beside him a loaf, and some meat, and a flask
of wine, of such a kind, that however much he took of them, they would
never grow less. After that she drew a gold ring, on which her name was
engraved, off her finger, and put it upon one of his. Finally, she laid
a letter near him, in which, after giving him particulars of the food
and drink she had left for him, she finished with the following words:
‘I see that as long as you remain here you will never be able to set me
free; if, however, you still wish to do so, come to the golden castle
of Stromberg; this is well within your power to accomplish.’ She then
returned to her carriage and drove to the golden castle of Stromberg.

When the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping, he was grieved
at heart, and said, ‘She has no doubt been here and driven away again,
and it is now too late for me to save her.’ Then his eyes fell on the
things which were lying beside him; he read the letter, and knew from it
all that had happened. He rose up without delay, eager to start on his
way and to reach the castle of Stromberg, but he had no idea in which
direction he ought to go. He travelled about a long time in search of it
and came at last to a dark forest, through which he went on walking for
fourteen days and still could not find a way out. Once more the night
came on, and worn out he lay down under a bush and fell asleep. Again
the next day he pursued his way through the forest, and that evening,
thinking to rest again, he lay down as before, but he heard such a
howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep. He waited till
it was darker and people had begun to light up their houses, and then
seeing a little glimmer ahead of him, he went towards it.

He found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than
it really was, from the contrast of its height with that of an immense
giant who stood in front of it. He thought to himself, ‘If the giant
sees me going in, my life will not be worth much.’ However, after a
while he summoned up courage and went forward. When the giant saw him,
he called out, ‘It is lucky for that you have come, for I have not had
anything to eat for a long time. I can have you now for my supper.’ ‘I
would rather you let that alone,’ said the man, ‘for I do not willingly
give myself up to be eaten; if you are wanting food I have enough to
satisfy your hunger.’ ‘If that is so,’ replied the giant, ‘I will leave
you in peace; I only thought of eating you because I had nothing else.’

So they went indoors together and sat down, and the man brought out the
bread, meat, and wine, which although he had eaten and drunk of them,
were still unconsumed. The giant was pleased with the good cheer, and
ate and drank to his heart’s content. When he had finished his supper
the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of Stromberg.
The giant said, ‘I will look on my map; on it are marked all the towns,
villages, and houses.’ So he fetched his map, and looked for the castle,
but could not find it. ‘Never mind,’ he said, ‘I have larger maps
upstairs in the cupboard, we will look on those,’ but they searched in
vain, for the castle was not marked even on these. The man now thought
he should like to continue his journey, but the giant begged him to
remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother, who was
away in search of provisions. When the brother came home, they asked him
about the castle of Stromberg, and he told them he would look on his own
maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger. Accordingly, when
he had finished his supper, they all went up together to his room and
looked through his maps, but the castle was not to be found. Then he
fetched other older maps, and they went on looking for the castle until
at last they found it, but it was many thousand miles away. ‘How shall I
be able to get there?’ asked the man. ‘I have two hours to spare,’ said
the giant, ‘and I will carry you into the neighbourhood of the castle; I
must then return to look after the child who is in our care.’

The giant, thereupon, carried the man to within about a hundred leagues
of the castle, where he left him, saying, ‘You will be able to walk the
remainder of the way yourself.’ The man journeyed on day and night
till he reached the golden castle of Stromberg. He found it situated,
however, on a glass mountain, and looking up from the foot he saw the
enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside. He was
overjoyed to see her, and longed to get to the top of the mountain, but
the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he
fell back again. When he saw that it was impossible to reach her, he was
greatly grieved, and said to himself, ‘I will remain here and wait for
her,’ so he built himself a little hut, and there he sat and watched for
a whole year, and every day he saw the king’s daughter driving round her
castle, but still was unable to get nearer to her.

Looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he
called out to them, ‘God be with you.’ They stopped when they heard the
call, but looking round and seeing nobody, they went on again with their
fighting, which now became more furious. ‘God be with you,’ he cried
again, and again they paused and looked about, but seeing no one went
back to their fighting. A third time he called out, ‘God be with you,’
and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between
the three men, he went out and asked them why they were fighting so
angrily with one another. One of them said that he had found a stick,
and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he
wished to pass, and it immediately flew open. Another told him that he
had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible; and the third had
caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle, and even
up the glass mountain. They had been unable to decide whether they
would keep together and have the things in common, or whether they would
separate. On hearing this, the man said, ‘I will give you something in
exchange for those three things; not money, for that I have not got,
but something that is of far more value. I must first, however, prove
whether all you have told me about your three things is true.’ The
robbers, therefore, made him get on the horse, and handed him the stick
and the cloak, and when he had put this round him he was no longer
visible. Then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after
another, crying, ‘There, you idle vagabonds, you have got what you
deserve; are you satisfied now!’

After this he rode up the glass mountain. When he reached the gate of
the castle, he found it closed, but he gave it a blow with his stick,
and it flew wide open at once and he passed through. He mounted the
steps and entered the room where the maiden was sitting, with a golden
goblet full of wine in front of her. She could not see him for he still
wore his cloak. He took the ring which she had given him off his finger,
and threw it into the goblet, so that it rang as it touched the bottom.
‘That is my own ring,’ she exclaimed, ‘and if that is so the man must
also be here who is coming to set me free.’

She sought for him about the castle, but could find him nowhere.
Meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off
the cloak. When therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him, and
cried aloud for joy. Then he dismounted and took her in his arms; and
she kissed him, and said, ‘Now you have indeed set me free, and tomorrow
we will celebrate our marriage.’




THE GOLDEN GOOSE

There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dummling,[*] and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.

It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,
and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a
bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.

When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade
him good day, and said: ‘Do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket,
and let me have a draught of your wine; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ But
the clever son answered: ‘If I give you my cake and wine, I shall have
none for myself; be off with you,’ and he left the little man standing
and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made a
false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to go home
and have it bound up. And this was the little grey man’s doing.

After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave him,
like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The little old grey man
met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine.
But the second son, too, said sensibly enough: ‘What I give you will be
taken away from myself; be off!’ and he left the little man standing and
went on. His punishment, however, was not delayed; when he had made a
few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg, so that he had to be
carried home.

Then Dummling said: ‘Father, do let me go and cut wood.’ The father
answered: ‘Your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,
you do not understand anything about it.’ But Dummling begged so long
that at last he said: ‘Just go then, you will get wiser by hurting
yourself.’ His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the
cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,
and greeting him, said: ‘Give me a piece of your cake and a drink out
of your bottle; I am so hungry and thirsty.’ Dummling answered: ‘I have
only cinder-cake and sour beer; if that pleases you, we will sit
down and eat.’ So they sat down, and when Dummling pulled out his
cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, and the sour beer had become good
wine. So they ate and drank, and after that the little man said: ‘Since
you have a good heart, and are willing to divide what you have, I will
give you good luck. There stands an old tree, cut it down, and you will
find something at the roots.’ Then the little man took leave of him.

Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was a goose
sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her up, and
taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he would stay the
night. Now the host had three daughters, who saw the goose and were
curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, and would have
liked to have one of its golden feathers.

The eldest thought: ‘I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather,’ and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose by
the wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last the third also came with the like intent, and the others
screamed out: ‘Keep away; for goodness’ sake keep away!’ But she did
not understand why she was to keep away. ‘The others are there,’ she
thought, ‘I may as well be there too,’ and ran to them; but as soon as
she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her. So they
had to spend the night with the goose.

The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to
it. They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, now right,
wherever his legs took him.

In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said: ‘For shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why are you
running across the fields after this young man? Is that seemly?’ At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away,
but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, and was himself
obliged to run behind.

Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson, running
behind three girls. He was astonished at this and called out: ‘Hi!
your reverence, whither away so quickly? Do not forget that we have a
christening today!’ and running after him he took him by the sleeve, but
was also held fast to it.

Whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two labourers
came with their hoes from the fields; the parson called out to them
and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. But they had
scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast, and now there were
seven of them running behind Dummling and the goose.

Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had a daughter
who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. So he had put forth
a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry
her. When Dummling heard this, he went with his goose and all her train
before the king’s daughter, and as soon as she saw the seven people
running on and on, one behind the other, she began to laugh quite
loudly, and as if she would never stop. Thereupon Dummling asked to have
her for his wife; but the king did not like the son-in-law, and made all
manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink
a cellarful of wine. Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could
certainly help him; so he went into the forest, and in the same place
where he had felled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very
sorrowful face. Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so
sorely, and he answered: ‘I have such a great thirst and cannot quench
it; cold water I cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but
that to me is like a drop on a hot stone!’

‘There, I can help you,’ said Dummling, ‘just come with me and you shall
be satisfied.’

He led him into the king’s cellar, and the man bent over the huge
barrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the day was
out he had emptied all the barrels. Then Dummling asked once more
for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom
everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and he made a
new condition; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain
of bread. Dummling did not think long, but went straight into the
forest, where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his
body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying: ‘I have eaten a
whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when one has such a hunger
as I? My stomach remains empty, and I must tie myself up if I am not to
die of hunger.’

At this Dummling was glad, and said: ‘Get up and come with me; you shall
eat yourself full.’ He led him to the king’s palace where all the
flour in the whole Kingdom was collected, and from it he caused a huge
mountain of bread to be baked. The man from the forest stood before it,
began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished.
Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride; but the king again
sought a way out, and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on
water. ‘As soon as you come sailing back in it,’ said he, ‘you shall
have my daughter for wife.’

Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little grey
man to whom he had given his cake. When he heard what Dummling wanted,
he said: ‘Since you have given me to eat and to drink, I will give you
the ship; and I do all this because you once were kind to me.’ Then he
gave him the ship which could sail on land and water, and when the king
saw that, he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter. The
wedding was celebrated, and after the king’s death, Dummling inherited
his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife.

     [*] Simpleton




THE WATER OF LIFE

Long before you or I were born, there reigned, in a country a great way
off, a king who had three sons. This king once fell very ill--so ill
that nobody thought he could live. His sons were very much grieved
at their father’s sickness; and as they were walking together very
mournfully in the garden of the palace, a little old man met them and
asked what was the matter. They told him that their father was very ill,
and that they were afraid nothing could save him. ‘I know what would,’
said the little old man; ‘it is the Water of Life. If he could have a
draught of it he would be well again; but it is very hard to get.’ Then
the eldest son said, ‘I will soon find it’: and he went to the sick
king, and begged that he might go in search of the Water of Life, as
it was the only thing that could save him. ‘No,’ said the king. ‘I had
rather die than place you in such great danger as you must meet with in
your journey.’ But he begged so hard that the king let him go; and the
prince thought to himself, ‘If I bring my father this water, he will
make me sole heir to his kingdom.’

Then he set out: and when he had gone on his way some time he came to a
deep valley, overhung with rocks and woods; and as he looked around, he
saw standing above him on one of the rocks a little ugly dwarf, with a
sugarloaf cap and a scarlet cloak; and the dwarf called to him and said,
‘Prince, whither so fast?’ ‘What is that to thee, you ugly imp?’ said
the prince haughtily, and rode on.

But the dwarf was enraged at his behaviour, and laid a fairy spell
of ill-luck upon him; so that as he rode on the mountain pass became
narrower and narrower, and at last the way was so straitened that he
could not go to step forward: and when he thought to have turned his
horse round and go back the way he came, he heard a loud laugh ringing
round him, and found that the path was closed behind him, so that he was
shut in all round. He next tried to get off his horse and make his way
on foot, but again the laugh rang in his ears, and he found himself
unable to move a step, and thus he was forced to abide spellbound.

Meantime the old king was lingering on in daily hope of his son’s
return, till at last the second son said, ‘Father, I will go in search
of the Water of Life.’ For he thought to himself, ‘My brother is surely
dead, and the kingdom will fall to me if I find the water.’ The king was
at first very unwilling to let him go, but at last yielded to his wish.
So he set out and followed the same road which his brother had done,
and met with the same elf, who stopped him at the same spot in the
mountains, saying, as before, ‘Prince, prince, whither so fast?’ ‘Mind
your own affairs, busybody!’ said the prince scornfully, and rode on.

But the dwarf put the same spell upon him as he put on his elder
brother, and he, too, was at last obliged to take up his abode in the
heart of the mountains. Thus it is with proud silly people, who think
themselves above everyone else, and are too proud to ask or take advice.

When the second prince had thus been gone a long time, the youngest son
said he would go and search for the Water of Life, and trusted he should
soon be able to make his father well again. So he set out, and the dwarf
met him too at the same spot in the valley, among the mountains, and
said, ‘Prince, whither so fast?’ And the prince said, ‘I am going in
search of the Water of Life, because my father is ill, and like to die:
can you help me? Pray be kind, and aid me if you can!’ ‘Do you know
where it is to be found?’ asked the dwarf. ‘No,’ said the prince, ‘I do
not. Pray tell me if you know.’ ‘Then as you have spoken to me kindly,
and are wise enough to seek for advice, I will tell you how and where to
go. The water you seek springs from a well in an enchanted castle; and,
that you may be able to reach it in safety, I will give you an iron wand
and two little loaves of bread; strike the iron door of the castle three
times with the wand, and it will open: two hungry lions will be lying
down inside gaping for their prey, but if you throw them the bread they
will let you pass; then hasten on to the well, and take some of the
Water of Life before the clock strikes twelve; for if you tarry longer
the door will shut upon you for ever.’

Then the prince thanked his little friend with the scarlet cloak for his
friendly aid, and took the wand and the bread, and went travelling on
and on, over sea and over land, till he came to his journey’s end, and
found everything to be as the dwarf had told him. The door flew open at
the third stroke of the wand, and when the lions were quieted he went on
through the castle and came at length to a beautiful hall. Around it he
saw several knights sitting in a trance; then he pulled off their rings
and put them on his own fingers. In another room he saw on a table a
sword and a loaf of bread, which he also took. Further on he came to a
room where a beautiful young lady sat upon a couch; and she welcomed him
joyfully, and said, if he would set her free from the spell that bound
her, the kingdom should be his, if he would come back in a year and
marry her. Then she told him that the well that held the Water of Life
was in the palace gardens; and bade him make haste, and draw what he
wanted before the clock struck twelve.

He walked on; and as he walked through beautiful gardens he came to a
delightful shady spot in which stood a couch; and he thought to himself,
as he felt tired, that he would rest himself for a while, and gaze on
the lovely scenes around him. So he laid himself down, and sleep
fell upon him unawares, so that he did not wake up till the clock was
striking a quarter to twelve. Then he sprang from the couch dreadfully
frightened, ran to the well, filled a cup that was standing by him full
of water, and hastened to get away in time. Just as he was going out of
the iron door it struck twelve, and the door fell so quickly upon him
that it snapped off a piece of his heel.

When he found himself safe, he was overjoyed to think that he had got
the Water of Life; and as he was going on his way homewards, he passed
by the little dwarf, who, when he saw the sword and the loaf, said, ‘You
have made a noble prize; with the sword you can at a blow slay whole
armies, and the bread will never fail you.’ Then the prince thought
to himself, ‘I cannot go home to my father without my brothers’; so he
said, ‘My dear friend, cannot you tell me where my two brothers are, who
set out in search of the Water of Life before me, and never came back?’
‘I have shut them up by a charm between two mountains,’ said the dwarf,
‘because they were proud and ill-behaved, and scorned to ask advice.’
The prince begged so hard for his brothers, that the dwarf at last set
them free, though unwillingly, saying, ‘Beware of them, for they have
bad hearts.’ Their brother, however, was greatly rejoiced to see them,
and told them all that had happened to him; how he had found the Water
of Life, and had taken a cup full of it; and how he had set a beautiful
princess free from a spell that bound her; and how she had engaged to
wait a whole year, and then to marry him, and to give him the kingdom.

Then they all three rode on together, and on their way home came to a
country that was laid waste by war and a dreadful famine, so that it was
feared all must die for want. But the prince gave the king of the land
the bread, and all his kingdom ate of it. And he lent the king the
wonderful sword, and he slew the enemy’s army with it; and thus the
kingdom was once more in peace and plenty. In the same manner he
befriended two other countries through which they passed on their way.

When they came to the sea, they got into a ship and during their voyage
the two eldest said to themselves, ‘Our brother has got the water which
we could not find, therefore our father will forsake us and give him the
kingdom, which is our right’; so they were full of envy and revenge, and
agreed together how they could ruin him. Then they waited till he was
fast asleep, and poured the Water of Life out of the cup, and took it
for themselves, giving him bitter sea-water instead.

When they came to their journey’s end, the youngest son brought his cup
to the sick king, that he might drink and be healed. Scarcely, however,
had he tasted the bitter sea-water when he became worse even than he was
before; and then both the elder sons came in, and blamed the youngest
for what they had done; and said that he wanted to poison their father,
but that they had found the Water of Life, and had brought it with them.
He no sooner began to drink of what they brought him, than he felt his
sickness leave him, and was as strong and well as in his younger days.
Then they went to their brother, and laughed at him, and said, ‘Well,
brother, you found the Water of Life, did you? You have had the trouble
and we shall have the reward. Pray, with all your cleverness, why did
not you manage to keep your eyes open? Next year one of us will take
away your beautiful princess, if you do not take care. You had better
say nothing about this to our father, for he does not believe a word you
say; and if you tell tales, you shall lose your life into the bargain:
but be quiet, and we will let you off.’

The old king was still very angry with his youngest son, and thought
that he really meant to have taken away his life; so he called his court
together, and asked what should be done, and all agreed that he ought to
be put to death. The prince knew nothing of what was going on, till one
day, when the king’s chief huntsmen went a-hunting with him, and they
were alone in the wood together, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that
the prince said, ‘My friend, what is the matter with you?’ ‘I cannot and
dare not tell you,’ said he. But the prince begged very hard, and said,
‘Only tell me what it is, and do not think I shall be angry, for I will
forgive you.’ ‘Alas!’ said the huntsman; ‘the king has ordered me to
shoot you.’ The prince started at this, and said, ‘Let me live, and I
will change dresses with you; you shall take my royal coat to show to my
father, and do you give me your shabby one.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said
the huntsman; ‘I am sure I shall be glad to save you, for I could not
have shot you.’ Then he took the prince’s coat, and gave him the shabby
one, and went away through the wood.

Some time after, three grand embassies came to the old king’s court,
with rich gifts of gold and precious stones for his youngest son; now
all these were sent from the three kings to whom he had lent his sword
and loaf of bread, in order to rid them of their enemy and feed their
people. This touched the old king’s heart, and he thought his son might
still be guiltless, and said to his court, ‘O that my son were still
alive! how it grieves me that I had him killed!’ ‘He is still alive,’
said the huntsman; ‘and I am glad that I had pity on him, but let him
go in peace, and brought home his royal coat.’ At this the king was
overwhelmed with joy, and made it known throughout all his kingdom, that
if his son would come back to his court he would forgive him.

Meanwhile the princess was eagerly waiting till her deliverer should
come back; and had a road made leading up to her palace all of shining
gold; and told her courtiers that whoever came on horseback, and rode
straight up to the gate upon it, was her true lover; and that they must
let him in: but whoever rode on one side of it, they must be sure was
not the right one; and that they must send him away at once.

The time soon came, when the eldest brother thought that he would make
haste to go to the princess, and say that he was the one who had set
her free, and that he should have her for his wife, and the kingdom with
her. As he came before the palace and saw the golden road, he stopped to
look at it, and he thought to himself, ‘It is a pity to ride upon this
beautiful road’; so he turned aside and rode on the right-hand side of
it. But when he came to the gate, the guards, who had seen the road
he took, said to him, he could not be what he said he was, and must go
about his business.

The second prince set out soon afterwards on the same errand; and when
he came to the golden road, and his horse had set one foot upon it,
he stopped to look at it, and thought it very beautiful, and said to
himself, ‘What a pity it is that anything should tread here!’ Then he
too turned aside and rode on the left side of it. But when he came to
the gate the guards said he was not the true prince, and that he too
must go away about his business; and away he went.

Now when the full year was come round, the third brother left the forest
in which he had lain hid for fear of his father’s anger, and set out in
search of his betrothed bride. So he journeyed on, thinking of her all
the way, and rode so quickly that he did not even see what the road was
made of, but went with his horse straight over it; and as he came to the
gate it flew open, and the princess welcomed him with joy, and said
he was her deliverer, and should now be her husband and lord of the
kingdom. When the first joy at their meeting was over, the princess told
him she had heard of his father having forgiven him, and of his wish to
have him home again: so, before his wedding with the princess, he went
to visit his father, taking her with him. Then he told him everything;
how his brothers had cheated and robbed him, and yet that he had borne
all those wrongs for the love of his father. And the old king was very
angry, and wanted to punish his wicked sons; but they made their escape,
and got into a ship and sailed away over the wide sea, and where they
went to nobody knew and nobody cared.

And now the old king gathered together his court, and asked all his
kingdom to come and celebrate the wedding of his son and the princess.
And young and old, noble and squire, gentle and simple, came at once
on the summons; and among the rest came the friendly dwarf, with the
sugarloaf hat, and a new scarlet cloak.

  And the wedding was held, and the merry bells run.
  And all the good people they danced and they sung,
  And feasted and frolick’d I can’t tell how long.




THE TWELVE HUNTSMEN

There was once a king’s son who had a bride whom he loved very much. And
when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that his father
lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again before his end.
Then he said to his beloved: ‘I must now go and leave you, I give you
a ring as a remembrance of me. When I am king, I will return and fetch
you.’ So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter was
dangerously ill, and near his death. He said to him: ‘Dear son, I wished
to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as I wish,’ and
he named a certain king’s daughter who was to be his wife. The son was
in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing, and said: ‘Yes,
dear father, your will shall be done,’ and thereupon the king shut his
eyes, and died.

When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time of
mourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he had given
his father, and caused the king’s daughter to be asked in marriage, and
she was promised to him. His first betrothed heard of this, and fretted
so much about his faithfulness that she nearly died. Then her father
said to her: ‘Dearest child, why are you so sad? You shall have
whatsoever you will.’ She thought for a moment and said: ‘Dear father,
I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself in face, figure, and size.’
The father said: ‘If it be possible, your desire shall be fulfilled,’
and he caused a search to be made in his whole kingdom, until eleven
young maidens were found who exactly resembled his daughter in face,
figure, and size.

When they came to the king’s daughter, she had twelve suits of
huntsmen’s clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to put
on the huntsmen’s clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took her leave of her father, and rode away with them,
and rode to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.
Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take all of
them into his service. The king looked at her and did not know her, but
as they were such handsome fellows, he said: ‘Yes,’ and that he would
willingly take them, and now they were the king’s twelve huntsmen.

The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for he knew
all concealed and secret things. It came to pass that one evening he
said to the king: ‘You think you have twelve huntsmen?’ ‘Yes,’ said the
king, ‘they are twelve huntsmen.’ The lion continued: ‘You are mistaken,
they are twelve girls.’ The king said: ‘That cannot be true! How
will you prove that to me?’ ‘Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the
ante-chamber,’ answered the lion, ‘and then you will soon see. Men have
a firm step, and when they walk over peas none of them stir, but girls
trip and skip, and drag their feet, and the peas roll about.’ The king
was well pleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.

There was, however, a servant of the king’s who favoured the huntsmen,
and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he went to
them and repeated everything, and said: ‘The lion wants to make the king
believe that you are girls.’ Then the king’s daughter thanked him, and
said to her maidens: ‘Show some strength, and step firmly on the peas.’
So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmen called before
him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peas were lying, they
stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong, sure walk, that not
one of the peas either rolled or stirred. Then they went away again,
and the king said to the lion: ‘You have lied to me, they walk just like
men.’ The lion said: ‘They have been informed that they were going to
be put to the test, and have assumed some strength. Just let twelve
spinning-wheels be brought into the ante-chamber, and they will go to
them and be pleased with them, and that is what no man would do.’
The king liked the advice, and had the spinning-wheels placed in the
ante-chamber.

But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,
and disclosed the project. So when they were alone the king’s daughter
said to her eleven girls: ‘Show some constraint, and do not look round
at the spinning-wheels.’ And next morning when the king had his twelve
huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber, and never once
looked at the spinning-wheels. Then the king again said to the lion:
‘You have deceived me, they are men, for they have not looked at the
spinning-wheels.’ The lion replied: ‘They have restrained themselves.’
The king, however, would no longer believe the lion.

The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and his
liking for them continually increased. Now it came to pass that
once when they were out hunting, news came that the king’s bride was
approaching. When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so much that
her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to the ground. The
king thought something had happened to his dear huntsman, ran up to him,
wanted to help him, and drew his glove off. Then he saw the ring which
he had given to his first bride, and when he looked in her face he
recognized her. Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and
when she opened her eyes he said: ‘You are mine, and I am yours, and
no one in the world can alter that.’ He sent a messenger to the other
bride, and entreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wife
already, and someone who had just found an old key did not require a new
one. Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was again taken
into favour, because, after all, he had told the truth.




THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN

There was once a merchant who had only one child, a son, that was very
young, and barely able to run alone. He had two richly laden ships then
making a voyage upon the seas, in which he had embarked all his wealth,
in the hope of making great gains, when the news came that both were
lost. Thus from being a rich man he became all at once so very poor that
nothing was left to him but one small plot of land; and there he often
went in an evening to take his walk, and ease his mind of a little of
his trouble.

One day, as he was roaming along in a brown study, thinking with no
great comfort on what he had been and what he now was, and was like
to be, all on a sudden there stood before him a little, rough-looking,
black dwarf. ‘Prithee, friend, why so sorrowful?’ said he to the
merchant; ‘what is it you take so deeply to heart?’ ‘If you would do me
any good I would willingly tell you,’ said the merchant. ‘Who knows but
I may?’ said the little man: ‘tell me what ails you, and perhaps you
will find I may be of some use.’ Then the merchant told him how all his
wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea, and how he had nothing left
but that little plot of land. ‘Oh, trouble not yourself about that,’
said the dwarf; ‘only undertake to bring me here, twelve years hence,
whatever meets you first on your going home, and I will give you as much
as you please.’ The merchant thought this was no great thing to ask;
that it would most likely be his dog or his cat, or something of that
sort, but forgot his little boy Heinel; so he agreed to the bargain, and
signed and sealed the bond to do what was asked of him.

But as he drew near home, his little boy was so glad to see him that he
crept behind him, and laid fast hold of his legs, and looked up in
his face and laughed. Then the father started, trembling with fear and
horror, and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do; but as no
gold was come, he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke
that the dwarf was playing him, and that, at any rate, when the money
came, he should see the bearer, and would not take it in.

About a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look
for some old iron, that he might sell it and raise a little money; and
there, instead of his iron, he saw a large pile of gold lying on the
floor. At the sight of this he was overjoyed, and forgetting all about
his son, went into trade again, and became a richer merchant than
before.

Meantime little Heinel grew up, and as the end of the twelve years drew
near the merchant began to call to mind his bond, and became very sad
and thoughtful; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face. The
boy one day asked what was the matter, but his father would not tell for
some time; at last, however, he said that he had, without knowing it,
sold him for gold to a little, ugly-looking, black dwarf, and that the
twelve years were coming round when he must keep his word. Then Heinel
said, ‘Father, give yourself very little trouble about that; I shall be
too much for the little man.’

When the time came, the father and son went out together to the place
agreed upon: and the son drew a circle on the ground, and set himself
and his father in the middle of it. The little black dwarf soon came,
and walked round and round about the circle, but could not find any way
to get into it, and he either could not, or dared not, jump over it. At
last the boy said to him. ‘Have you anything to say to us, my friend, or
what do you want?’ Now Heinel had found a friend in a good fairy, that
was fond of him, and had told him what to do; for this fairy knew what
good luck was in store for him. ‘Have you brought me what you said you
would?’ said the dwarf to the merchant. The old man held his tongue, but
Heinel said again, ‘What do you want here?’ The dwarf said, ‘I come to
talk with your father, not with you.’ ‘You have cheated and taken in my
father,’ said the son; ‘pray give him up his bond at once.’ ‘Fair and
softly,’ said the little old man; ‘right is right; I have paid my money,
and your father has had it, and spent it; so be so good as to let me
have what I paid it for.’ ‘You must have my consent to that first,’ said
Heinel, ‘so please to step in here, and let us talk it over.’ The old
man grinned, and showed his teeth, as if he should have been very glad
to get into the circle if he could. Then at last, after a long talk,
they came to terms. Heinel agreed that his father must give him up, and
that so far the dwarf should have his way: but, on the other hand, the
fairy had told Heinel what fortune was in store for him, if he followed
his own course; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed
friend, who seemed so anxious for his company.

So, to make a sort of drawn battle of the matter, it was settled that
Heinel should be put into an open boat, that lay on the sea-shore hard
by; that the father should push him off with his own hand, and that he
should thus be set adrift, and left to the bad or good luck of wind and
weather. Then he took leave of his father, and set himself in the boat,
but before it got far off a wave struck it, and it fell with one side
low in the water, so the merchant thought that poor Heinel was lost, and
went home very sorrowful, while the dwarf went his way, thinking that at
any rate he had had his revenge.

The boat, however, did not sink, for the good fairy took care of her
friend, and soon raised the boat up again, and it went safely on. The
young man sat safe within, till at length it ran ashore upon an unknown
land. As he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle
but empty and dreary within, for it was enchanted. ‘Here,’ said he to
himself, ‘must I find the prize the good fairy told me of.’ So he once
more searched the whole palace through, till at last he found a white
snake, lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers.

Now the white snake was an enchanted princess; and she was very glad
to see him, and said, ‘Are you at last come to set me free? Twelve
long years have I waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she
promised, for you alone can save me. This night twelve men will come:
their faces will be black, and they will be dressed in chain armour.
They will ask what you do here, but give no answer; and let them do
what they will--beat, whip, pinch, prick, or torment you--bear all; only
speak not a word, and at twelve o’clock they must go away. The second
night twelve others will come: and the third night twenty-four, who
will even cut off your head; but at the twelfth hour of that night their
power is gone, and I shall be free, and will come and bring you the
Water of Life, and will wash you with it, and bring you back to life
and health.’ And all came to pass as she had said; Heinel bore all, and
spoke not a word; and the third night the princess came, and fell on his
neck and kissed him. Joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle,
the wedding was celebrated, and he was crowned king of the Golden
Mountain.

They lived together very happily, and the queen had a son. And thus
eight years had passed over their heads, when the king thought of his
father; and he began to long to see him once again. But the queen was
against his going, and said, ‘I know well that misfortunes will come
upon us if you go.’ However, he gave her no rest till she agreed. At his
going away she gave him a wishing-ring, and said, ‘Take this ring, and
put it on your finger; whatever you wish it will bring you; only promise
never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father’s house.’ Then
he said he would do what she asked, and put the ring on his finger, and
wished himself near the town where his father lived.

Heinel found himself at the gates in a moment; but the guards would
not let him go in, because he was so strangely clad. So he went up to a
neighbouring hill, where a shepherd dwelt, and borrowed his old frock,
and thus passed unknown into the town. When he came to his father’s
house, he said he was his son; but the merchant would not believe him,
and said he had had but one son, his poor Heinel, who he knew was long
since dead: and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd, he would
not even give him anything to eat. The king, however, still vowed that
he was his son, and said, ‘Is there no mark by which you would know me
if I am really your son?’ ‘Yes,’ said his mother, ‘our Heinel had a mark
like a raspberry on his right arm.’ Then he showed them the mark, and
they knew that what he had said was true.

He next told them how he was king of the Golden Mountain, and was
married to a princess, and had a son seven years old. But the merchant
said, ‘that can never be true; he must be a fine king truly who travels
about in a shepherd’s frock!’ At this the son was vexed; and forgetting
his word, turned his ring, and wished for his queen and son. In an
instant they stood before him; but the queen wept, and said he had
broken his word, and bad luck would follow. He did all he could to
soothe her, and she at last seemed to be appeased; but she was not so in
truth, and was only thinking how she should punish him.

One day he took her to walk with him out of the town, and showed her
the spot where the boat was set adrift upon the wide waters. Then he sat
himself down, and said, ‘I am very much tired; sit by me, I will rest my
head in your lap, and sleep a while.’ As soon as he had fallen asleep,
however, she drew the ring from his finger, and crept softly away, and
wished herself and her son at home in their kingdom. And when he awoke
he found himself alone, and saw that the ring was gone from his finger.
‘I can never go back to my father’s house,’ said he; ‘they would say I
am a sorcerer: I will journey forth into the world, till I come again to
my kingdom.’

So saying he set out and travelled till he came to a hill, where three
giants were sharing their father’s goods; and as they saw him pass they
cried out and said, ‘Little men have sharp wits; he shall part the goods
between us.’ Now there was a sword that cut off an enemy’s head whenever
the wearer gave the words, ‘Heads off!’; a cloak that made the owner
invisible, or gave him any form he pleased; and a pair of boots that
carried the wearer wherever he wished. Heinel said they must first let
him try these wonderful things, then he might know how to set a value
upon them. Then they gave him the cloak, and he wished himself a fly,
and in a moment he was a fly. ‘The cloak is very well,’ said he: ‘now
give me the sword.’ ‘No,’ said they; ‘not unless you undertake not to
say, “Heads off!” for if you do we are all dead men.’ So they gave it
him, charging him to try it on a tree. He next asked for the boots also;
and the moment he had all three in his power, he wished himself at
the Golden Mountain; and there he was at once. So the giants were left
behind with no goods to share or quarrel about.

As Heinel came near his castle he heard the sound of merry music; and
the people around told him that his queen was about to marry another
husband. Then he threw his cloak around him, and passed through the
castle hall, and placed himself by the side of the queen, where no one
saw him. But when anything to eat was put upon her plate, he took it
away and ate it himself; and when a glass of wine was handed to her, he
took it and drank it; and thus, though they kept on giving her meat and
drink, her plate and cup were always empty.

Upon this, fear and remorse came over her, and she went into her chamber
alone, and sat there weeping; and he followed her there. ‘Alas!’ said
she to herself, ‘was I not once set free? Why then does this enchantment
still seem to bind me?’

‘False and fickle one!’ said he. ‘One indeed came who set thee free, and
he is now near thee again; but how have you used him? Ought he to
have had such treatment from thee?’ Then he went out and sent away the
company, and said the wedding was at an end, for that he was come back
to the kingdom. But the princes, peers, and great men mocked at him.
However, he would enter into no parley with them, but only asked them
if they would go in peace or not. Then they turned upon him and tried
to seize him; but he drew his sword. ‘Heads Off!’ cried he; and with the
word the traitors’ heads fell before him, and Heinel was once more king
of the Golden Mountain.




DOCTOR KNOWALL

There was once upon a time a poor peasant called Crabb, who drove with
two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctor for two
talers. When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that
the doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how well he
ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and would willingly
have been a doctor too. So he remained standing a while, and at length
inquired if he too could not be a doctor. ‘Oh, yes,’ said the doctor,
‘that is soon managed.’ ‘What must I do?’ asked the peasant. ‘In the
first place buy yourself an A B C book of the kind which has a cock on
the frontispiece; in the second, turn your cart and your two oxen into
money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else pertains to
medicine; thirdly, have a sign painted for yourself with the words: “I
am Doctor Knowall,” and have that nailed up above your house-door.’ The
peasant did everything that he had been told to do. When he had doctored
people awhile, but not long, a rich and great lord had some money
stolen. Then he was told about Doctor Knowall who lived in such and such
a village, and must know what had become of the money. So the lord had
the horses harnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and
asked Crabb if he were Doctor Knowall. Yes, he was, he said. Then he was
to go with him and bring back the stolen money. ‘Oh, yes, but Grete, my
wife, must go too.’ The lord was willing, and let both of them have a
seat in the carriage, and they all drove away together. When they came
to the nobleman’s castle, the table was spread, and Crabb was told to
sit down and eat. ‘Yes, but my wife, Grete, too,’ said he, and he seated
himself with her at the table. And when the first servant came with a
dish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said: ‘Grete,
that was the first,’ meaning that was the servant who brought the first
dish. The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say: ‘That is
the first thief,’ and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said
to his comrade outside: ‘The doctor knows all: we shall fare ill, he
said I was the first.’ The second did not want to go in at all, but was
forced. So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged his wife,
and said: ‘Grete, that is the second.’ This servant was equally alarmed,
and he got out as fast as he could. The third fared no better, for the
peasant again said: ‘Grete, that is the third.’ The fourth had to carry
in a dish that was covered, and the lord told the doctor that he was to
show his skill, and guess what was beneath the cover. Actually, there
were crabs. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and
cried: ‘Ah, poor Crabb.’ When the lord heard that, he cried: ‘There! he
knows it; he must also know who has the money!’

On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a sign to the
doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment. When therefore
he went out, all four of them confessed to him that they had stolen
the money, and said that they would willingly restore it and give him a
heavy sum into the bargain, if he would not denounce them, for if he
did they would be hanged. They led him to the spot where the money was
concealed. With this the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall,
sat down to the table, and said: ‘My lord, now will I search in my book
where the gold is hidden.’ The fifth servant, however, crept into the
stove to hear if the doctor knew still more. But the doctor sat still
and opened his A B C book, turned the pages backwards and forwards, and
looked for the cock. As he could not find it immediately he said: ‘I
know you are there, so you had better come out!’ Then the fellow in the
stove thought that the doctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out,
crying: ‘That man knows everything!’ Then Doctor Knowall showed the lord
where the money was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received
from both sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.




THE SEVEN RAVENS

There was once a man who had seven sons, and last of all one daughter.
Although the little girl was very pretty, she was so weak and small that
they thought she could not live; but they said she should at once be
christened.

So the father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to get some
water, but the other six ran with him. Each wanted to be first at
drawing the water, and so they were in such a hurry that all let their
pitchers fall into the well, and they stood very foolishly looking at
one another, and did not know what to do, for none dared go home. In the
meantime the father was uneasy, and could not tell what made the
young men stay so long. ‘Surely,’ said he, ‘the whole seven must have
forgotten themselves over some game of play’; and when he had waited
still longer and they yet did not come, he flew into a rage and wished
them all turned into ravens. Scarcely had he spoken these words when he
heard a croaking over his head, and looked up and saw seven ravens as
black as coal flying round and round. Sorry as he was to see his wish
so fulfilled, he did not know how what was done could be undone, and
comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons
with his dear little daughter, who soon became stronger and every day
more beautiful.

For a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers; for
her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her: but one
day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them. ‘Yes,’ said
they, ‘she is beautiful indeed, but still ‘tis a pity that her brothers
should have been lost for her sake.’ Then she was much grieved, and went
to her father and mother, and asked if she had any brothers, and what
had become of them. So they dared no longer hide the truth from her, but
said it was the will of Heaven, and that her birth was only the innocent
cause of it; but the little girl mourned sadly about it every day, and
thought herself bound to do all she could to bring her brothers back;
and she had neither rest nor ease, till at length one day she stole
away, and set out into the wide world to find her brothers, wherever
they might be, and free them, whatever it might cost her.

She took nothing with her but a little ring which her father and mother
had given her, a loaf of bread in case she should be hungry, a little
pitcher of water in case she should be thirsty, and a little stool
to rest upon when she should be weary. Thus she went on and on, and
journeyed till she came to the world’s end; then she came to the sun,
but the sun looked much too hot and fiery; so she ran away quickly to
the moon, but the moon was cold and chilly, and said, ‘I smell flesh
and blood this way!’ so she took herself away in a hurry and came to the
stars, and the stars were friendly and kind to her, and each star sat
upon his own little stool; but the morning star rose up and gave her a
little piece of wood, and said, ‘If you have not this little piece of
wood, you cannot unlock the castle that stands on the glass-mountain,
and there your brothers live.’ The little girl took the piece of wood,
rolled it up in a little cloth, and went on again until she came to the
glass-mountain, and found the door shut. Then she felt for the little
piece of wood; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there, and
she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars. What was to be done?
She wanted to save her brothers, and had no key of the castle of the
glass-mountain; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her
pocket and cut off her little finger, that was just the size of the
piece of wood she had lost, and put it in the door and opened it.

As she went in, a little dwarf came up to her, and said, ‘What are you
seeking for?’ ‘I seek for my brothers, the seven ravens,’ answered she.
Then the dwarf said, ‘My masters are not at home; but if you will wait
till they come, pray step in.’ Now the little dwarf was getting their
dinner ready, and he brought their food upon seven little plates, and
their drink in seven little glasses, and set them upon the table, and
out of each little plate their sister ate a small piece, and out of each
little glass she drank a small drop; but she let the ring that she had
brought with her fall into the last glass.

On a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air, and the
dwarf said, ‘Here come my masters.’ When they came in, they wanted to
eat and drink, and looked for their little plates and glasses. Then said
one after the other,

‘Who has eaten from my little plate? And who has been drinking out of my
little glass?’

 ‘Caw! Caw! well I ween
  Mortal lips have this way been.’

When the seventh came to the bottom of his glass, and found there the
ring, he looked at it, and knew that it was his father’s and mother’s,
and said, ‘O that our little sister would but come! then we should be
free.’ When the little girl heard this (for she stood behind the door
all the time and listened), she ran forward, and in an instant all
the ravens took their right form again; and all hugged and kissed each
other, and went merrily home.




THE WEDDING OF MRS FOX


FIRST STORY

There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, who believed that
his wife was not faithful to him, and wished to put her to the test. He
stretched himself out under the bench, did not move a limb, and behaved
as if he were stone dead. Mrs Fox went up to her room, shut herself in,
and her maid, Miss Cat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking. When it
became known that the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.
The maid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking. She went
and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said:

 ‘What may you be about, Miss Cat?
  Do you sleep or do you wake?’

She answered:

 ‘I am not sleeping, I am waking,
  Would you know what I am making?
  I am boiling warm beer with butter,
  Will you be my guest for supper?’

‘No, thank you, miss,’ said the fox, ‘what is Mrs Fox doing?’ The maid
replied:

 ‘She is sitting in her room,
  Moaning in her gloom,
  Weeping her little eyes quite red,
  Because old Mr Fox is dead.’

‘Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would like to woo
her.’ ‘Certainly, young sir.’

  The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,
  The door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,
 ‘Mistress Fox, are you inside?’
 ‘Oh, yes, my little cat,’ she cried.
 ‘A wooer he stands at the door out there.’
 ‘What does he look like, my dear?’

‘Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late Mr Fox?’ ‘Oh, no,’ answered
the cat, ‘he has only one.’ ‘Then I will not have him.’

Miss Cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away. Soon afterwards there
was another knock, and another fox was at the door who wished to woo Mrs
Fox. He had two tails, but he did not fare better than the first. After
this still more came, each with one tail more than the other, but they
were all turned away, until at last one came who had nine tails, like
old Mr Fox. When the widow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat:

 ‘Now open the gates and doors all wide,
  And carry old Mr Fox outside.’

But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old Mr Fox stirred
under the bench, and cudgelled all the rabble, and drove them and Mrs
Fox out of the house.


SECOND STORY

When old Mr Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knocked at the
door, and the cat who was servant to Mrs Fox, opened it for him. The
wolf greeted her, and said:

 ‘Good day, Mrs Cat of Kehrewit,
  How comes it that alone you sit?
  What are you making good?’

The cat replied:

 ‘In milk I’m breaking bread so sweet,
  Will you be my guest, and eat?’

‘No, thank you, Mrs Cat,’ answered the wolf. ‘Is Mrs Fox not at home?’

The cat said:

 ‘She sits upstairs in her room,
  Bewailing her sorrowful doom,
  Bewailing her trouble so sore,
  For old Mr Fox is no more.’

The wolf answered:

 ‘If she’s in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please her to step below?’
  The cat runs quickly up the stair,
  And lets her tail fly here and there,
  Until she comes to the parlour door.
  With her five gold rings at the door she knocks:
 ‘Are you within, good Mistress Fox?
  If you’re in want of a husband now,
  Then will it please you to step below?

Mrs Fox asked: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he a pointed
mouth?’ ‘No,’ answered the cat. ‘Then he won’t do for me.’

When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion, and
all the beasts of the forest, one after the other. But one of the good
qualities which old Mr Fox had possessed, was always lacking, and the
cat had continually to send the suitors away. At length came a young
fox. Then Mrs Fox said: ‘Has the gentleman red stockings on, and has a
little pointed mouth?’ ‘Yes,’ said the cat, ‘he has.’ ‘Then let him come
upstairs,’ said Mrs Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding
feast.

 ‘Sweep me the room as clean as you can,
  Up with the window, fling out my old man!
  For many a fine fat mouse he brought,
  Yet of his wife he never thought,
  But ate up every one he caught.’

Then the wedding was solemnized with young Mr Fox, and there was much
rejoicing and dancing; and if they have not left off, they are dancing
still.




THE SALAD

As a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood,
there came up a little old woman, and said to him, ‘Good day, good day;
you seem merry enough, but I am hungry and thirsty; do pray give me
something to eat.’ The huntsman took pity on her, and put his hand in
his pocket and gave her what he had. Then he wanted to go his way; but
she took hold of him, and said, ‘Listen, my friend, to what I am going
to tell you; I will reward you for your kindness; go your way, and after
a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds
sitting on a cloak. Shoot into the midst of them, and one will fall down
dead: the cloak will fall too; take it, it is a wishing-cloak, and when
you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to
be. Cut open the dead bird, take out its heart and keep it, and you will
find a piece of gold under your pillow every morning when you rise. It
is the bird’s heart that will bring you this good luck.’

The huntsman thanked her, and thought to himself, ‘If all this does
happen, it will be a fine thing for me.’ When he had gone a hundred
steps or so, he heard a screaming and chirping in the branches over him,
and looked up and saw a flock of birds pulling a cloak with their bills
and feet; screaming, fighting, and tugging at each other as if
each wished to have it himself. ‘Well,’ said the huntsman, ‘this is
wonderful; this happens just as the old woman said’; then he shot into
the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about. Off went the
flock chattering away; but one fell down dead, and the cloak with it.
Then the huntsman did as the old woman told him, cut open the bird, took
out the heart, and carried the cloak home with him.

The next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow, and there lay
the piece of gold glittering underneath; the same happened next day, and
indeed every day when he arose. He heaped up a great deal of gold, and
at last thought to himself, ‘Of what use is this gold to me whilst I am
at home? I will go out into the world and look about me.’

Then he took leave of his friends, and hung his bag and bow about his
neck, and went his way. It so happened that his road one day led through
a thick wood, at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow,
and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young
lady by her side looking about them. Now the old woman was a witch, and
said to the young lady, ‘There is a young man coming out of the wood who
carries a wonderful prize; we must get it away from him, my dear child,
for it is more fit for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart that
brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning.’ Meantime the
huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady, and said to himself, ‘I
have been travelling so long that I should like to go into this castle
and rest myself, for I have money enough to pay for anything I want’;
but the real reason was, that he wanted to see more of the beautiful
lady. Then he went into the house, and was welcomed kindly; and it was
not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else
but looking at the lady’s eyes, and doing everything that she wished.
Then the old woman said, ‘Now is the time for getting the bird’s heart.’
So the lady stole it away, and he never found any more gold under his
pillow, for it lay now under the young lady’s, and the old woman took it
away every morning; but he was so much in love that he never missed his
prize.

‘Well,’ said the old witch, ‘we have got the bird’s heart, but not the
wishing-cloak yet, and that we must also get.’ ‘Let us leave him that,’
said the young lady; ‘he has already lost his wealth.’ Then the witch
was very angry, and said, ‘Such a cloak is a very rare and wonderful
thing, and I must and will have it.’ So she did as the old woman told
her, and set herself at the window, and looked about the country and
seemed very sorrowful; then the huntsman said, ‘What makes you so sad?’
‘Alas! dear sir,’ said she, ‘yonder lies the granite rock where all the
costly diamonds grow, and I want so much to go there, that whenever I
think of it I cannot help being sorrowful, for who can reach it? only
the birds and the flies--man cannot.’ ‘If that’s all your grief,’ said
the huntsman, ‘I’ll take you there with all my heart’; so he drew her under
his cloak, and the moment he wished to be on the granite mountain they
were both there. The diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were
delighted with the sight and picked up the finest. But the old witch
made a deep sleep come upon him, and he said to the young lady, ‘Let us
sit down and rest ourselves a little, I am so tired that I cannot stand
any longer.’ So they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap and
fell asleep; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from
his shoulders, hung it on her own, picked up the diamonds, and wished
herself home again.

When he awoke and found that his lady had tricked him, and left him
alone on the wild rock, he said, ‘Alas! what roguery there is in the
world!’ and there he sat in great grief and fear, not knowing what to
do. Now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it; and as
he saw three of them striding about, he thought to himself, ‘I can only
save myself by feigning to be asleep’; so he laid himself down as if he
were in a sound sleep. When the giants came up to him, the first pushed
him with his foot, and said, ‘What worm is this that lies here curled
up?’ ‘Tread upon him and kill him,’ said the second. ‘It’s not worth the
trouble,’ said the third; ‘let him live, he’ll go climbing higher up the
mountain, and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away.’ And they
passed on. But the huntsman had heard all they said; and as soon as they
were gone, he climbed to the top of the mountain, and when he had sat
there a short time a cloud came rolling around him, and caught him in a
whirlwind and bore him along for some time, till it settled in a garden,
and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages.

Then he looked around him, and said, ‘I wish I had something to eat, if
not I shall be worse off than before; for here I see neither apples
nor pears, nor any kind of fruits, nothing but vegetables.’ At last he
thought to himself, ‘I can eat salad, it will refresh and strengthen
me.’ So he picked out a fine head and ate of it; but scarcely had he
swallowed two bites when he felt himself quite changed, and saw with
horror that he was turned into an ass. However, he still felt very
hungry, and the salad tasted very nice; so he ate on till he came
to another kind of salad, and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt
another change come over him, and soon saw that he was lucky enough to
have found his old shape again.

Then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness; and
when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and
the bad salad, and thought to himself, ‘This will help me to my fortune
again, and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery.’ So he
went away to try and find the castle of his friends; and after wandering
about a few days he luckily found it. Then he stained his face all over
brown, so that even his mother would not have known him, and went into
the castle and asked for a lodging; ‘I am so tired,’ said he, ‘that I
can go no farther.’ ‘Countryman,’ said the witch, ‘who are you? and what
is your business?’ ‘I am,’ said he, ‘a messenger sent by the king to
find the finest salad that grows under the sun. I have been lucky
enough to find it, and have brought it with me; but the heat of the sun
scorches so that it begins to wither, and I don’t know that I can carry
it farther.’

When the witch and the young lady heard of his beautiful salad, they
longed to taste it, and said, ‘Dear countryman, let us just taste it.’
‘To be sure,’ answered he; ‘I have two heads of it with me, and will
give you one’; so he opened his bag and gave them the bad. Then the
witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed; and when it was
ready she could not wait till it was carried up, but took a few leaves
immediately and put them in her mouth, and scarcely were they swallowed
when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the
form of an ass. Now the servant-maid came into the kitchen, and seeing
the salad ready, was going to carry it up; but on the way she too felt a
wish to taste it as the old woman had done, and ate some leaves; so she
also was turned into an ass and ran after the other, letting the dish
with the salad fall on the ground. The messenger sat all this time with
the beautiful young lady, and as nobody came with the salad and she
longed to taste it, she said, ‘I don’t know where the salad can be.’
Then he thought something must have happened, and said, ‘I will go
into the kitchen and see.’ And as he went he saw two asses in the court
running about, and the salad lying on the ground. ‘All right!’ said
he; ‘those two have had their share.’ Then he took up the rest of
the leaves, laid them on the dish and brought them to the young lady,
saying, ‘I bring you the dish myself that you may not wait any longer.’
So she ate of it, and like the others ran off into the court braying
away.

Then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they
might know him. ‘Now you shall be paid for your roguery,’ said he; and
tied them all three to a rope and took them along with him till he
came to a mill and knocked at the window. ‘What’s the matter?’ said the
miller. ‘I have three tiresome beasts here,’ said the other; ‘if you
will take them, give them food and room, and treat them as I tell you,
I will pay you whatever you ask.’ ‘With all my heart,’ said the miller;
‘but how shall I treat them?’ Then the huntsman said, ‘Give the old
one stripes three times a day and hay once; give the next (who was
the servant-maid) stripes once a day and hay three times; and give
the youngest (who was the beautiful lady) hay three times a day and
no stripes’: for he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten.
After this he went back to the castle, where he found everything he
wanted.

Some days after, the miller came to him and told him that the old ass
was dead; ‘The other two,’ said he, ‘are alive and eat, but are so
sorrowful that they cannot last long.’ Then the huntsman pitied them,
and told the miller to drive them back to him, and when they came, he
gave them some of the good salad to eat. And the beautiful young lady
fell upon her knees before him, and said, ‘O dearest huntsman! forgive
me all the ill I have done you; my mother forced me to it, it was
against my will, for I always loved you very much. Your wishing-cloak
hangs up in the closet, and as for the bird’s heart, I will give it you
too.’ But he said, ‘Keep it, it will be just the same thing, for I mean
to make you my wife.’ So they were married, and lived together very
happily till they died.




THE STORY OF THE YOUTH WHO WENT FORTH TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS

A certain father had two sons, the elder of who was smart and sensible,
and could do everything, but the younger was stupid and could neither
learn nor understand anything, and when people saw him they said:
‘There’s a fellow who will give his father some trouble!’ When anything
had to be done, it was always the elder who was forced to do it; but
if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late, or in the
night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or any other dismal
place, he answered: ‘Oh, no father, I’ll not go there, it makes me
shudder!’ for he was afraid. Or when stories were told by the fire at
night which made the flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said: ‘Oh,
it makes us shudder!’ The younger sat in a corner and listened with
the rest of them, and could not imagine what they could mean. ‘They are
always saying: “It makes me shudder, it makes me shudder!” It does not
make me shudder,’ thought he. ‘That, too, must be an art of which I
understand nothing!’

Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day: ‘Hearken to me,
you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong, and you
too must learn something by which you can earn your bread. Look how your
brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.’ ‘Well, father,’ he
replied, ‘I am quite willing to learn something--indeed, if it could but
be managed, I should like to learn how to shudder. I don’t understand
that at all yet.’ The elder brother smiled when he heard that, and
thought to himself: ‘Goodness, what a blockhead that brother of mine is!
He will never be good for anything as long as he lives! He who wants to
be a sickle must bend himself betimes.’

The father sighed, and answered him: ‘You shall soon learn what it is to
shudder, but you will not earn your bread by that.’

Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, and the father
bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son was so backward
in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing. ‘Just think,’
said he, ‘when I asked him how he was going to earn his bread, he
actually wanted to learn to shudder.’ ‘If that be all,’ replied the
sexton, ‘he can learn that with me. Send him to me, and I will soon
polish him.’ The father was glad to do it, for he thought: ‘It will
train the boy a little.’ The sexton therefore took him into his house,
and he had to ring the church bell. After a day or two, the sexton awoke
him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and
ring the bell. ‘You shall soon learn what shuddering is,’ thought he,
and secretly went there before him; and when the boy was at the top of
the tower and turned round, and was just going to take hold of the bell
rope, he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding
hole. ‘Who is there?’ cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did
not move or stir. ‘Give an answer,’ cried the boy, ‘or take yourself
off, you have no business here at night.’

The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy might
think he was a ghost. The boy cried a second time: ‘What do you want
here?--speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you down the
steps!’ The sexton thought: ‘He can’t mean to be as bad as his words,’
uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone. Then the boy
called to him for the third time, and as that was also to no purpose,
he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, so that it fell
down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner. Thereupon he
rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word went to bed, and
fell asleep. The sexton’s wife waited a long time for her husband, but
he did not come back. At length she became uneasy, and wakened the boy,
and asked: ‘Do you know where my husband is? He climbed up the tower
before you did.’ ‘No, I don’t know,’ replied the boy, ‘but someone was
standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps, and as he
would neither give an answer nor go away, I took him for a scoundrel,
and threw him downstairs. Just go there and you will see if it was he.
I should be sorry if it were.’ The woman ran away and found her husband,
who was lying moaning in the corner, and had broken his leg.

She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to the
boy’s father, ‘Your boy,’ cried she, ‘has been the cause of a great
misfortune! He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his
leg. Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.’ The father was
terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy. ‘What wicked tricks
are these?’ said he. ‘The devil must have put them into your head.’
‘Father,’ he replied, ‘do listen to me. I am quite innocent. He was
standing there by night like one intent on doing evil. I did not know
who it was, and I entreated him three times either to speak or to go
away.’ ‘Ah,’ said the father, ‘I have nothing but unhappiness with you.
Go out of my sight. I will see you no more.’

‘Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day. Then will I
go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,
understand one art which will support me.’ ‘Learn what you will,’ spoke
the father, ‘it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talers for you.
Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one from whence you
come, and who is your father, for I have reason to be ashamed of you.’
‘Yes, father, it shall be as you will. If you desire nothing more than
that, I can easily keep it in mind.’

When the day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into his
pocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said to
himself: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could but shudder!’ Then a man
approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with
himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where they could
see the gallows, the man said to him: ‘Look, there is the tree where
seven men have married the ropemaker’s daughter, and are now learning
how to fly. Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes, and you will
soon learn how to shudder.’ ‘If that is all that is wanted,’ answered
the youth, ‘it is easily done; but if I learn how to shudder as fast as
that, you shall have my fifty talers. Just come back to me early in the
morning.’ Then the youth went to the gallows, sat down beneath it, and
waited till evening came. And as he was cold, he lighted himself a fire,
but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire, he
could not get warm. And as the wind knocked the hanged men against each
other, and they moved backwards and forwards, he thought to himself:
‘If you shiver below by the fire, how those up above must freeze and
suffer!’ And as he felt pity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed
up, unbound one of them after the other, and brought down all seven.
Then he stoked the fire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm
themselves. But they sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught
their clothes. So he said: ‘Take care, or I will hang you up again.’ The
dead men, however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their
rags go on burning. At this he grew angry, and said: ‘If you will not
take care, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,’ and he hung
them up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fell
asleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have
the fifty talers, and said: ‘Well do you know how to shudder?’ ‘No,’
answered he, ‘how should I know? Those fellows up there did not open
their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which
they had on their bodies get burnt.’ Then the man saw that he would not
get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying: ‘Such a youth has
never come my way before.’

The youth likewise went his way, and once more began to mutter to
himself: ‘Ah, if I could but shudder! Ah, if I could but shudder!’ A
waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked: ‘Who are
you?’ ‘I don’t know,’ answered the youth. Then the waggoner asked: ‘From
whence do you come?’ ‘I know not.’ ‘Who is your father?’ ‘That I may
not tell you.’ ‘What is it that you are always muttering between your
teeth?’ ‘Ah,’ replied the youth, ‘I do so wish I could shudder, but
no one can teach me how.’ ‘Enough of your foolish chatter,’ said the
waggoner. ‘Come, go with me, I will see about a place for you.’ The
youth went with the waggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn
where they wished to pass the night. Then at the entrance of the parlour
the youth again said quite loudly: ‘If I could but shudder! If I could
but shudder!’ The host who heard this, laughed and said: ‘If that is
your desire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.’ ‘Ah,
be silent,’ said the hostess, ‘so many prying persons have already lost
their lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as
these should never see the daylight again.’

But the youth said: ‘However difficult it may be, I will learn it. For
this purpose indeed have I journeyed forth.’ He let the host have
no rest, until the latter told him, that not far from thence stood a
haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was,
if he would but watch in it for three nights. The king had promised that
he who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she was the
most beautiful maiden the sun shone on. Likewise in the castle lay great
treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and these treasures would
then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough. Already many men
had gone into the castle, but as yet none had come out again. Then the
youth went next morning to the king, and said: ‘If it be allowed, I will
willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle.’

The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, he said: ‘You may
ask for three things to take into the castle with you, but they must
be things without life.’ Then he answered: ‘Then I ask for a fire, a
turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.’

The king had these things carried into the castle for him during the
day. When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself
a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knife
beside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe. ‘Ah, if I could
but shudder!’ said he, ‘but I shall not learn it here either.’ Towards
midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowing it,
something cried suddenly from one corner: ‘Au, miau! how cold we are!’
‘You fools!’ cried he, ‘what are you crying about? If you are cold, come
and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.’ And when he had said
that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down
on each side of him, and looked savagely at him with their fiery
eyes. After a short time, when they had warmed themselves, they said:
‘Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?’ ‘Why not?’ he replied, ‘but
just show me your paws.’ Then they stretched out their claws. ‘Oh,’ said
he, ‘what long nails you have! Wait, I must first cut them for you.’
Thereupon he seized them by the throats, put them on the cutting-board
and screwed their feet fast. ‘I have looked at your fingers,’ said he,
‘and my fancy for card-playing has gone,’ and he struck them dead and
threw them out into the water. But when he had made away with these two,
and was about to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and
corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more
and more of them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled
horribly, and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put
it out. He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were
going too far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried: ‘Away with you,
vermin,’ and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the others
he killed, and threw out into the fish-pond. When he came back he fanned
the embers of his fire again and warmed himself. And as he thus sat, his
eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire to sleep. Then he
looked round and saw a great bed in the corner. ‘That is the very thing
for me,’ said he, and got into it. When he was just going to shut his
eyes, however, the bed began to move of its own accord, and went over
the whole of the castle. ‘That’s right,’ said he, ‘but go faster.’ Then
the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it, up and down,
over thresholds and stairs, but suddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside
down, and lay on him like a mountain. But he threw quilts and pillows up
in the air, got out and said: ‘Now anyone who likes, may drive,’ and
lay down by his fire, and slept till it was day. In the morning the king
came, and when he saw him lying there on the ground, he thought the evil
spirits had killed him and he was dead. Then said he: ‘After all it is a
pity,--for so handsome a man.’ The youth heard it, got up, and said: ‘It
has not come to that yet.’ Then the king was astonished, but very glad,
and asked how he had fared. ‘Very well indeed,’ answered he; ‘one
night is past, the two others will pass likewise.’ Then he went to the
innkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said: ‘I never expected to
see you alive again! Have you learnt how to shudder yet?’ ‘No,’ said he,
‘it is all in vain. If someone would but tell me!’

The second night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by the
fire, and once more began his old song: ‘If I could but shudder!’ When
midnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard; at
first it was low, but it grew louder and louder. Then it was quiet for
a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came down the
chimney and fell before him. ‘Hullo!’ cried he, ‘another half belongs
to this. This is not enough!’ Then the uproar began again, there was a
roaring and howling, and the other half fell down likewise. ‘Wait,’ said
he, ‘I will just stoke up the fire a little for you.’ When he had done
that and looked round again, the two pieces were joined together, and a
hideous man was sitting in his place. ‘That is no part of our bargain,’
said the youth, ‘the bench is mine.’ The man wanted to push him away;
the youth, however, would not allow that, but thrust him off with all
his strength, and seated himself again in his own place. Then still more
men fell down, one after the other; they brought nine dead men’s legs
and two skulls, and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The
youth also wanted to play and said: ‘Listen you, can I join you?’ ‘Yes,
if you have any money.’ ‘Money enough,’ replied he, ‘but your balls are
not quite round.’ Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and
turned them till they were round. ‘There, now they will roll better!’
said he. ‘Hurrah! now we’ll have fun!’ He played with them and lost some
of his money, but when it struck twelve, everything vanished from his
sight. He lay down and quietly fell asleep. Next morning the king came
to inquire after him. ‘How has it fared with you this time?’ asked he.
‘I have been playing at nine-pins,’ he answered, ‘and have lost a couple
of farthings.’ ‘Have you not shuddered then?’ ‘What?’ said he, ‘I have
had a wonderful time! If I did but know what it was to shudder!’

The third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly:
‘If I could but shudder.’ When it grew late, six tall men came in and
brought a coffin. Then he said: ‘Ha, ha, that is certainly my little
cousin, who died only a few days ago,’ and he beckoned with his finger,
and cried: ‘Come, little cousin, come.’ They placed the coffin on the
ground, but he went to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay
therein. He felt his face, but it was cold as ice. ‘Wait,’ said he, ‘I
will warm you a little,’ and went to the fire and warmed his hand and
laid it on the dead man’s face, but he remained cold. Then he took him
out, and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his
arms that the blood might circulate again. As this also did no good, he
thought to himself: ‘When two people lie in bed together, they warm each
other,’ and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay down by
him. After a short time the dead man became warm too, and began to move.
Then said the youth, ‘See, little cousin, have I not warmed you?’ The
dead man, however, got up and cried: ‘Now will I strangle you.’

‘What!’ said he, ‘is that the way you thank me? You shall at once go
into your coffin again,’ and he took him up, threw him into it, and shut
the lid. Then came the six men and carried him away again. ‘I cannot
manage to shudder,’ said he. ‘I shall never learn it here as long as I
live.’

Then a man entered who was taller than all others, and looked terrible.
He was old, however, and had a long white beard. ‘You wretch,’ cried he,
‘you shall soon learn what it is to shudder, for you shall die.’ ‘Not so
fast,’ replied the youth. ‘If I am to die, I shall have to have a say
in it.’ ‘I will soon seize you,’ said the fiend. ‘Softly, softly, do not
talk so big. I am as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.’
‘We shall see,’ said the old man. ‘If you are stronger, I will let you
go--come, we will try.’ Then he led him by dark passages to a smith’s
forge, took an axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.
‘I can do better than that,’ said the youth, and went to the other
anvil. The old man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his
white beard hung down. Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil
with one blow, and in it caught the old man’s beard. ‘Now I have you,’
said the youth. ‘Now it is your turn to die.’ Then he seized an iron bar
and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop, when he
would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go.
The old man led him back into the castle, and in a cellar showed him
three chests full of gold. ‘Of these,’ said he, ‘one part is for the
poor, the other for the king, the third yours.’ In the meantime it
struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so that the youth stood in
darkness. ‘I shall still be able to find my way out,’ said he, and felt
about, found the way into the room, and slept there by his fire.
Next morning the king came and said: ‘Now you must have learnt what
shuddering is?’ ‘No,’ he answered; ‘what can it be? My dead cousin was
here, and a bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down
below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.’ ‘Then,’ said the
king, ‘you have saved the castle, and shall marry my daughter.’ ‘That
is all very well,’ said he, ‘but still I do not know what it is to
shudder!’

Then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated; but howsoever
much the young king loved his wife, and however happy he was, he still
said always: ‘If I could but shudder--if I could but shudder.’ And this
at last angered her. Her waiting-maid said: ‘I will find a cure for him;
he shall soon learn what it is to shudder.’ She went out to the stream
which flowed through the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons
brought to her. At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was
to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water
with the gudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would
sprawl about him. Then he woke up and cried: ‘Oh, what makes me shudder
so?--what makes me shudder so, dear wife? Ah! now I know what it is to
shudder!’




KING GRISLY-BEARD

A great king of a land far away in the East had a daughter who was very
beautiful, but so proud, and haughty, and conceited, that none of the
princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her, and she
only made sport of them.

Once upon a time the king held a great feast, and asked thither all
her suitors; and they all sat in a row, ranged according to their
rank--kings, and princes, and dukes, and earls, and counts, and barons,
and knights. Then the princess came in, and as she passed by them she
had something spiteful to say to every one. The first was too fat: ‘He’s
as round as a tub,’ said she. The next was too tall: ‘What a maypole!’
said she. The next was too short: ‘What a dumpling!’ said she. The
fourth was too pale, and she called him ‘Wallface.’ The fifth was too
red, so she called him ‘Coxcomb.’ The sixth was not straight enough;
so she said he was like a green stick, that had been laid to dry over
a baker’s oven. And thus she had some joke to crack upon every one: but
she laughed more than all at a good king who was there. ‘Look at
him,’ said she; ‘his beard is like an old mop; he shall be called
Grisly-beard.’ So the king got the nickname of Grisly-beard.

But the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved,
and how she ill-treated all his guests; and he vowed that, willing or
unwilling, she should marry the first man, be he prince or beggar, that
came to the door.

Two days after there came by a travelling fiddler, who began to play
under the window and beg alms; and when the king heard him, he said,
‘Let him come in.’ So they brought in a dirty-looking fellow; and when
he had sung before the king and the princess, he begged a boon. Then the
king said, ‘You have sung so well, that I will give you my daughter for
your wife.’ The princess begged and prayed; but the king said, ‘I have
sworn to give you to the first comer, and I will keep my word.’ So words
and tears were of no avail; the parson was sent for, and she was married
to the fiddler. When this was over the king said, ‘Now get ready to
go--you must not stay here--you must travel on with your husband.’

Then the fiddler went his way, and took her with him, and they soon came
to a great wood. ‘Pray,’ said she, ‘whose is this wood?’ ‘It belongs
to King Grisly-beard,’ answered he; ‘hadst thou taken him, all had been
thine.’ ‘Ah! unlucky wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘would that I had
married King Grisly-beard!’ Next they came to some fine meadows. ‘Whose
are these beautiful green meadows?’ said she. ‘They belong to King
Grisly-beard, hadst thou taken him, they had all been thine.’ ‘Ah!
unlucky wretch that I am!’ said she; ‘would that I had married King
Grisly-beard!’

Then they came to a great city. ‘Whose is this noble city?’ said she.
‘It belongs to King Grisly-beard; hadst thou taken him, it had all been
thine.’ ‘Ah! wretch that I am!’ sighed she; ‘why did I not marry King
Grisly-beard?’ ‘That is no business of mine,’ said the fiddler: ‘why
should you wish for another husband? Am not I good enough for you?’

At last they came to a small cottage. ‘What a paltry place!’ said she;
‘to whom does that little dirty hole belong?’ Then the fiddler said,
‘That is your and my house, where we are to live.’ ‘Where are your
servants?’ cried she. ‘What do we want with servants?’ said he; ‘you
must do for yourself whatever is to be done. Now make the fire, and put
on water and cook my supper, for I am very tired.’ But the princess knew
nothing of making fires and cooking, and the fiddler was forced to help
her. When they had eaten a very scanty meal they went to bed; but the
fiddler called her up very early in the morning to clean the house. Thus
they lived for two days: and when they had eaten up all there was in the
cottage, the man said, ‘Wife, we can’t go on thus, spending money and
earning nothing. You must learn to weave baskets.’ Then he went out and
cut willows, and brought them home, and she began to weave; but it made
her fingers very sore. ‘I see this work won’t do,’ said he: ‘try and
spin; perhaps you will do that better.’ So she sat down and tried to
spin; but the threads cut her tender fingers till the blood ran. ‘See
now,’ said the fiddler, ‘you are good for nothing; you can do no work:
what a bargain I have got! However, I’ll try and set up a trade in pots
and pans, and you shall stand in the market and sell them.’ ‘Alas!’
sighed she, ‘if any of my father’s court should pass by and see me
standing in the market, how they will laugh at me!’

But her husband did not care for that, and said she must work, if she
did not wish to die of hunger. At first the trade went well; for many
people, seeing such a beautiful woman, went to buy her wares, and paid
their money without thinking of taking away the goods. They lived on
this as long as it lasted; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of
ware, and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market; but
a drunken soldier soon came by, and rode his horse against her stall,
and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces. Then she began to cry,
and knew not what to do. ‘Ah! what will become of me?’ said she; ‘what
will my husband say?’ So she ran home and told him all. ‘Who would
have thought you would have been so silly,’ said he, ‘as to put an
earthenware stall in the corner of the market, where everybody passes?
but let us have no more crying; I see you are not fit for this sort of
work, so I have been to the king’s palace, and asked if they did not
want a kitchen-maid; and they say they will take you, and there you will
have plenty to eat.’

Thus the princess became a kitchen-maid, and helped the cook to do all
the dirtiest work; but she was allowed to carry home some of the meat
that was left, and on this they lived.

She had not been there long before she heard that the king’s eldest son
was passing by, going to be married; and she went to one of the windows
and looked out. Everything was ready, and all the pomp and brightness of
the court was there. Then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly
which had brought her so low. And the servants gave her some of the rich
meats, which she put into her basket to take home.

All on a sudden, as she was going out, in came the king’s son in golden
clothes; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door, he took her
by the hand, and said she should be his partner in the dance; but she
trembled for fear, for she saw that it was King Grisly-beard, who was
making sport of her. However, he kept fast hold, and led her in; and the
cover of the basket came off, so that the meats in it fell about. Then
everybody laughed and jeered at her; and she was so abashed, that she
wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth. She sprang to the
door to run away; but on the steps King Grisly-beard overtook her, and
brought her back and said, ‘Fear me not! I am the fiddler who has lived
with you in the hut. I brought you there because I really loved you. I
am also the soldier that overset your stall. I have done all this only
to cure you of your silly pride, and to show you the folly of your
ill-treatment of me. Now all is over: you have learnt wisdom, and it is
time to hold our marriage feast.’

Then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes; and
her father and his whole court were there already, and welcomed her home
on her marriage. Joy was in every face and every heart. The feast was
grand; they danced and sang; all were merry; and I only wish that you
and I had been of the party.




IRON HANS

There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest near his
palace, full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a
huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back. ‘Perhaps some
accident has befallen him,’ said the king, and the next day he sent out
two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they too stayed away.
Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said: ‘Scour
the whole forest through, and do not give up until you have found all
three.’ But of these also, none came home again, none were seen again.
From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest,
and it lay there in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen
of it, but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. This lasted for
many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himself to the king as
seeking a situation, and offered to go into the dangerous forest. The
king, however, would not give his consent, and said: ‘It is not safe in
there; I fear it would fare with you no better than with the others,
and you would never come out again.’ The huntsman replied: ‘Lord, I will
venture it at my own risk, of fear I know nothing.’

The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It was
not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way, and wanted to
pursue it; but hardly had the dog run two steps when it stood before a
deep pool, could go no farther, and a naked arm stretched itself out of
the water, seized it, and drew it under. When the huntsman saw that, he
went back and fetched three men to come with buckets and bale out the
water. When they could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose body
was brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his face down to his
knees. They bound him with cords, and led him away to the castle. There
was great astonishment over the wild man; the king, however, had him put
in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened
on pain of death, and the queen herself was to take the key into her
keeping. And from this time forth everyone could again go into the
forest with safety.

The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in the
courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the cage.
The boy ran thither and said: ‘Give me my ball out.’ ‘Not till you have
opened the door for me,’ answered the man. ‘No,’ said the boy, ‘I will
not do that; the king has forbidden it,’ and ran away. The next day he
again went and asked for his ball; the wild man said: ‘Open my door,’
but the boy would not. On the third day the king had ridden out hunting,
and the boy went once more and said: ‘I cannot open the door even if I
wished, for I have not the key.’ Then the wild man said: ‘It lies under
your mother’s pillow, you can get it there.’ The boy, who wanted to have
his ball back, cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key. The
door opened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers. When it
was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball, and hurried
away. The boy had become afraid; he called and cried after him: ‘Oh,
wild man, do not go away, or I shall be beaten!’ The wild man turned
back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and went with hasty steps
into the forest. When the king came home, he observed the empty cage,
and asked the queen how that had happened. She knew nothing about it,
and sought the key, but it was gone. She called the boy, but no one
answered. The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, but
they did not find him. Then he could easily guess what had happened, and
much grief reigned in the royal court.

When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, he took the boy
down from his shoulder, and said to him: ‘You will never see your father
and mother again, but I will keep you with me, for you have set me free,
and I have compassion on you. If you do all I bid you, you shall fare
well. Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in the
world.’ He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept, and the
next morning the man took him to a well, and said: ‘Behold, the gold
well is as bright and clear as crystal, you shall sit beside it, and
take care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I will
come every evening to see if you have obeyed my order.’ The boy placed
himself by the brink of the well, and often saw a golden fish or a
golden snake show itself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.
As he was thus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that he
involuntarily put it in the water. He drew it quickly out again, but saw
that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever pains he took to wash the gold
off again, all was to no purpose. In the evening Iron Hans came back,
looked at the boy, and said: ‘What has happened to the well?’ ‘Nothing
nothing,’ he answered, and held his finger behind his back, that the
man might not see it. But he said: ‘You have dipped your finger into
the water, this time it may pass, but take care you do not again let
anything go in.’ By daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and
watching it. His finger hurt him again and he passed it over his head,
and then unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly
out, but it was already quite gilded. Iron Hans came, and already knew
what had happened. ‘You have let a hair fall into the well,’ said he.
‘I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if this happens for the
third time then the well is polluted and you can no longer remain with
me.’

On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger,
however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked at
the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he
still bent down more and more while he was doing so, and trying to look
straight into the eyes, his long hair fell down from his shoulders into
the water. He raised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of
his head was already golden and shone like the sun. You can imagine how
terrified the poor boy was! He took his pocket-handkerchief and tied it
round his head, in order that the man might not see it. When he came he
already knew everything, and said: ‘Take the handkerchief off.’ Then the
golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy excuse himself as he might,
it was of no use. ‘You have not stood the trial and can stay here no
longer. Go forth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.
But as you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there is
one thing I will grant you; if you fall into any difficulty, come to the
forest and cry: “Iron Hans,” and then I will come and help you. My
power is great, greater than you think, and I have gold and silver in
abundance.’

Then the king’s son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten
paths ever onwards until at length he reached a great city. There he
looked for work, but could find none, and he learnt nothing by which he
could help himself. At length he went to the palace, and asked if they
would take him in. The people about court did not at all know what use
they could make of him, but they liked him, and told him to stay. At
length the cook took him into his service, and said he might carry wood
and water, and rake the cinders together. Once when it so happened that
no one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry the food to the
royal table, but as he did not like to let his golden hair be seen, he
kept his little cap on. Such a thing as that had never yet come under
the king’s notice, and he said: ‘When you come to the royal table you
must take your hat off.’ He answered: ‘Ah, Lord, I cannot; I have a bad
sore place on my head.’ Then the king had the cook called before him
and scolded him, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into his
service; and that he was to send him away at once. The cook, however,
had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.

And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and bear
the wind and bad weather. Once in summer when he was working alone in
the garden, the day was so warm he took his little cap off that the air
might cool him. As the sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so
that the rays fell into the bedroom of the king’s daughter, and up she
sprang to see what that could be. Then she saw the boy, and cried to
him: ‘Boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.’ He put his cap on with all
haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound them together. When he
was ascending the stairs with them, the gardener met him, and said: ‘How
can you take the king’s daughter a garland of such common flowers? Go
quickly, and get another, and seek out the prettiest and rarest.’ ‘Oh,
no,’ replied the boy, ‘the wild ones have more scent, and will please
her better.’ When he got into the room, the king’s daughter said: ‘Take
your cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.’ He again
said: ‘I may not, I have a sore head.’ She, however, caught at his
cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hair rolled down on his
shoulders, and it was splendid to behold. He wanted to run out, but she
held him by the arm, and gave him a handful of ducats. With these he
departed, but he cared nothing for the gold pieces. He took them to the
gardener, and said: ‘I present them to your children, they can play with
them.’ The following day the king’s daughter again called to him that he
was to bring her a wreath of field-flowers, and then he went in with it,
she instantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away from him,
but he held it fast with both hands. She again gave him a handful of
ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave them to the gardener for
playthings for his children. On the third day things went just the
same; she could not get his cap away from him, and he would not have her
money.

Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war. The king gathered
together his people, and did not know whether or not he could offer any
opposition to the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty
army. Then said the gardener’s boy: ‘I am grown up, and will go to the
wars also, only give me a horse.’ The others laughed, and said: ‘Seek
one for yourself when we are gone, we will leave one behind us in the
stable for you.’ When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and
led the horse out; it was lame of one foot, and limped hobblety jib,
hobblety jib; nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark
forest. When he came to the outskirts, he called ‘Iron Hans’ three
times so loudly that it echoed through the trees. Thereupon the wild man
appeared immediately, and said: ‘What do you desire?’ ‘I want a strong
steed, for I am going to the wars.’ ‘That you shall have, and still more
than you ask for.’ Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it
was not long before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse that
snorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained, and behind
them followed a great troop of warriors entirely equipped in iron, and
their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made over his three-legged
horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and rode at the head of the
soldiers. When he got near the battlefield a great part of the king’s
men had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give
way. Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like
a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. They
began to flee, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there
was not a single man left. Instead of returning to the king, however, he
conducted his troop by byways back to the forest, and called forth Iron
Hans. ‘What do you desire?’ asked the wild man. ‘Take back your horse
and your troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.’ All that he
asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-legged horse. When
the king returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him, and
wished him joy of his victory. ‘I am not the one who carried away the
victory,’ said he, ‘but a strange knight who came to my assistance with
his soldiers.’ The daughter wanted to hear who the strange knight was,
but the king did not know, and said: ‘He followed the enemy, and I did
not see him again.’ She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but
he smiled, and said: ‘He has just come home on his three-legged horse,
and the others have been mocking him, and crying: “Here comes our
hobblety jib back again!” They asked, too: “Under what hedge have you
been lying sleeping all the time?” So he said: “I did the best of all,
and it would have gone badly without me.” And then he was still more
ridiculed.’

The king said to his daughter: ‘I will proclaim a great feast that shall
last for three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Perhaps the
unknown man will show himself.’ When the feast was announced, the youth
went out to the forest, and called Iron Hans. ‘What do you desire?’
asked he. ‘That I may catch the king’s daughter’s golden apple.’ ‘It is
as safe as if you had it already,’ said Iron Hans. ‘You shall likewise
have a suit of red armour for the occasion, and ride on a spirited
chestnut-horse.’ When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took
his place amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one. The king’s
daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to the knights, but none
of them caught it but he, only as soon as he had it he galloped away.

On the second day Iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, and gave him
a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and
he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it. The king grew
angry, and said: ‘That is not allowed; he must appear before me and tell
his name.’ He gave the order that if the knight who caught the apple,
should go away again they should pursue him, and if he would not come
back willingly, they were to cut him down and stab him.

On the third day, he received from Iron Hans a suit of black armour and
a black horse, and again he caught the apple. But when he was riding off
with it, the king’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near
him that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword. The
youth nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently
that the helmet fell from the youth’s head, and they could see that he
had golden hair. They rode back and announced this to the king.

The following day the king’s daughter asked the gardener about his
boy. ‘He is at work in the garden; the queer creature has been at the
festival too, and only came home yesterday evening; he has likewise
shown my children three golden apples which he has won.’

The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and again had
his little cap on his head. But the king’s daughter went up to him and
took it off, and then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and
he was so handsome that all were amazed. ‘Are you the knight who came
every day to the festival, always in different colours, and who caught
the three golden apples?’ asked the king. ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘and here
the apples are,’ and he took them out of his pocket, and returned them
to the king. ‘If you desire further proof, you may see the wound which
your people gave me when they followed me. But I am likewise the knight
who helped you to your victory over your enemies.’ ‘If you can perform
such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy; tell me, who is your
father?’ ‘My father is a mighty king, and gold have I in plenty as great
as I require.’ ‘I well see,’ said the king, ‘that I owe my thanks to
you; can I do anything to please you?’ ‘Yes,’ answered he, ‘that indeed
you can. Give me your daughter to wife.’ The maiden laughed, and said:
‘He does not stand much on ceremony, but I have already seen by his
golden hair that he was no gardener’s boy,’ and then she went and
kissed him. His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great
delight, for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear
son again. And as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music
suddenly stopped, the doors opened, and a stately king came in with a
great retinue. He went up to the youth, embraced him and said: ‘I am
Iron Hans, and was by enchantment a wild man, but you have set me free;
all the treasures which I possess, shall be your property.’




CAT-SKIN

There was once a king, whose queen had hair of the purest gold, and was
so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of
the earth. But this beautiful queen fell ill, and when she felt that her
end drew near she called the king to her and said, ‘Promise me that you
will never marry again, unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful
as I am, and who has golden hair like mine.’ Then when the king in his
grief promised all she asked, she shut her eyes and died. But the king
was not to be comforted, and for a long time never thought of taking
another wife. At last, however, his wise men said, ‘this will not do;
the king must marry again, that we may have a queen.’ So messengers were
sent far and wide, to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen.
But there was no princess in the world so beautiful; and if there had
been, still there was not one to be found who had golden hair. So the
messengers came home, and had had all their trouble for nothing.

Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her mother,
and had the same golden hair. And when she was grown up, the king looked
at her and saw that she was just like this late queen: then he said to
his courtiers, ‘May I not marry my daughter? She is the very image of my
dead wife: unless I have her, I shall not find any bride upon the whole
earth, and you say there must be a queen.’ When the courtiers heard this
they were shocked, and said, ‘Heaven forbid that a father should marry
his daughter! Out of so great a sin no good can come.’ And his daughter
was also shocked, but hoped the king would soon give up such thoughts;
so she said to him, ‘Before I marry anyone I must have three dresses:
one must be of gold, like the sun; another must be of shining silver,
like the moon; and a third must be dazzling as the stars: besides this,
I want a mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur put together, to
which every beast in the kingdom must give a part of his skin.’ And thus
she thought he would think of the matter no more. But the king made the
most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses: one golden,
like the sun; another silvery, like the moon; and a third sparkling,
like the stars: and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in
his kingdom, and to take the finest fur out of their skins: and thus a
mantle of a thousand furs was made.

When all were ready, the king sent them to her; but she got up in the
night when all were asleep, and took three of her trinkets, a golden
ring, a golden necklace, and a golden brooch, and packed the three
dresses--of the sun, the moon, and the stars--up in a nutshell, and
wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur, and besmeared
her face and hands with soot. Then she threw herself upon Heaven for
help in her need, and went away, and journeyed on the whole night, till
at last she came to a large wood. As she was very tired, she sat herself
down in the hollow of a tree and soon fell asleep: and there she slept
on till it was midday.

Now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it, his dogs
came to the tree, and began to snuff about, and run round and round, and
bark. ‘Look sharp!’ said the king to the huntsmen, ‘and see what sort
of game lies there.’ And the huntsmen went up to the tree, and when they
came back again said, ‘In the hollow tree there lies a most wonderful
beast, such as we never saw before; its skin seems to be of a thousand
kinds of fur, but there it lies fast asleep.’ ‘See,’ said the king, ‘if
you can catch it alive, and we will take it with us.’ So the huntsmen
took it up, and the maiden awoke and was greatly frightened, and said,
‘I am a poor child that has neither father nor mother left; have pity on
me and take me with you.’ Then they said, ‘Yes, Miss Cat-skin, you will
do for the kitchen; you can sweep up the ashes, and do things of that
sort.’ So they put her into the coach, and took her home to the king’s
palace. Then they showed her a little corner under the staircase, where
no light of day ever peeped in, and said, ‘Cat-skin, you may lie and
sleep there.’ And she was sent into the kitchen, and made to fetch wood
and water, to blow the fire, pluck the poultry, pick the herbs, sift the
ashes, and do all the dirty work.

Thus Cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully. ‘Ah! pretty
princess!’ thought she, ‘what will now become of thee?’ But it happened
one day that a feast was to be held in the king’s castle, so she said to
the cook, ‘May I go up a little while and see what is going on? I will
take care and stand behind the door.’ And the cook said, ‘Yes, you may
go, but be back again in half an hour’s time, to rake out the ashes.’
Then she took her little lamp, and went into her cabin, and took off the
fur skin, and washed the soot from off her face and hands, so that her
beauty shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds. She next opened
her nutshell, and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun,
and so went to the feast. Everyone made way for her, for nobody knew
her, and they thought she could be no less than a king’s daughter. But
the king came up to her, and held out his hand and danced with her; and
he thought in his heart, ‘I never saw any one half so beautiful.’

When the dance was at an end she curtsied; and when the king looked
round for her, she was gone, no one knew wither. The guards that stood
at the castle gate were called in: but they had seen no one. The truth
was, that she had run into her little cabin, pulled off her dress,
blackened her face and hands, put on the fur-skin cloak, and was
Cat-skin again. When she went into the kitchen to her work, and began
to rake the ashes, the cook said, ‘Let that alone till the morning, and
heat the king’s soup; I should like to run up now and give a peep: but
take care you don’t let a hair fall into it, or you will run a chance of
never eating again.’

As soon as the cook went away, Cat-skin heated the king’s soup, and
toasted a slice of bread first, as nicely as ever she could; and when it
was ready, she went and looked in the cabin for her little golden ring,
and put it into the dish in which the soup was. When the dance was over,
the king ordered his soup to be brought in; and it pleased him so well,
that he thought he had never tasted any so good before. At the bottom
he saw a gold ring lying; and as he could not make out how it had got
there, he ordered the cook to be sent for. The cook was frightened when
he heard the order, and said to Cat-skin, ‘You must have let a hair fall
into the soup; if it be so, you will have a good beating.’ Then he went
before the king, and he asked him who had cooked the soup. ‘I did,’
answered the cook. But the king said, ‘That is not true; it was better
done than you could do it.’ Then he answered, ‘To tell the truth I did
not cook it, but Cat-skin did.’ ‘Then let Cat-skin come up,’ said the
king: and when she came he said to her, ‘Who are you?’ ‘I am a poor
child,’ said she, ‘that has lost both father and mother.’ ‘How came you
in my palace?’ asked he. ‘I am good for nothing,’ said she, ‘but to be
scullion-girl, and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head.’ ‘But how
did you get the ring that was in the soup?’ asked the king. Then she
would not own that she knew anything about the ring; so the king sent
her away again about her business.

After a time there was another feast, and Cat-skin asked the cook to let
her go up and see it as before. ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘but come again in half
an hour, and cook the king the soup that he likes so much.’ Then she
ran to her little cabin, washed herself quickly, and took her dress
out which was silvery as the moon, and put it on; and when she went in,
looking like a king’s daughter, the king went up to her, and rejoiced at
seeing her again, and when the dance began he danced with her. After the
dance was at an end she managed to slip out, so slyly that the king did
not see where she was gone; but she sprang into her little cabin, and
made herself into Cat-skin again, and went into the kitchen to cook the
soup. Whilst the cook was above stairs, she got the golden necklace and
dropped it into the soup; then it was brought to the king, who ate it,
and it pleased him as well as before; so he sent for the cook, who
was again forced to tell him that Cat-skin had cooked it. Cat-skin was
brought again before the king, but she still told him that she was only
fit to have boots and shoes thrown at her head.

But when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third
time, it happened just the same as before. ‘You must be a witch,
Cat-skin,’ said the cook; ‘for you always put something into your soup,
so that it pleases the king better than mine.’ However, he let her go up
as before. Then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars, and
went into the ball-room in it; and the king danced with her again, and
thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then. So whilst
he was dancing with her, he put a gold ring on her finger without her
seeing it, and ordered that the dance should be kept up a long time.
When it was at an end, he would have held her fast by the hand, but she
slipped away, and sprang so quickly through the crowd that he lost sight
of her: and she ran as fast as she could into her little cabin under
the stairs. But this time she kept away too long, and stayed beyond the
half-hour; so she had not time to take off her fine dress, and threw her
fur mantle over it, and in her haste did not blacken herself all over
with soot, but left one of her fingers white.

Then she ran into the kitchen, and cooked the king’s soup; and as soon
as the cook was gone, she put the golden brooch into the dish. When the
king got to the bottom, he ordered Cat-skin to be called once more, and
soon saw the white finger, and the ring that he had put on it whilst
they were dancing: so he seized her hand, and kept fast hold of it, and
when she wanted to loose herself and spring away, the fur cloak fell off
a little on one side, and the starry dress sparkled underneath it.

Then he got hold of the fur and tore it off, and her golden hair and
beautiful form were seen, and she could no longer hide herself: so she
washed the soot and ashes from her face, and showed herself to be the
most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth. But the king said,
‘You are my beloved bride, and we will never more be parted from each
other.’ And the wedding feast was held, and a merry day it was, as ever
was heard of or seen in that country, or indeed in any other.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore
white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the
two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of one another that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together, and when Snow-white said:
‘We will not leave each other,’ Rose-red answered: ‘Never so long as we
live,’ and their mother would add: ‘What one has she must share with the
other.’

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no
beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still upon
the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the moss,
and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and did not
worry on their account.

Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused
them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near
their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing
and went into the forest. And when they looked round they found that
they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would certainly
have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces
further. And their mother told them that it must have been the angel who
watches over good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat that
it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red took care
of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother’s
bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter
Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hob. The kettle
was of brass and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. In the
evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said: ‘Go, Snow-white, and
bolt the door,’ and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took
her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls
listened as they sat and spun. And close by them lay a lamb upon the
floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head
hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, someone
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said:
‘Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveller who is seeking
shelter.’ Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a
poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black
head within the door.

Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered,
and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother’s bed. But the bear began
to speak and said: ‘Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm! I am
half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you.’

‘Poor bear,’ said the mother, ‘lie down by the fire, only take care that
you do not burn your coat.’ Then she cried: ‘Snow-white, Rose-red, come
out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.’ So they both came
out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid
of him. The bear said: ‘Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a
little’; so they brought the broom and swept the bear’s hide clean;
and he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably. It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played
tricks with their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands,
put their feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a
hazel-switch and beat him, and when he growled they laughed. But the
bear took it all in good part, only when they were too rough he called
out: ‘Leave me alive, children,

  Snow-white, Rose-red,
  Will you beat your wooer dead?’

When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the
bear: ‘You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from
the cold and the bad weather.’ As soon as day dawned the two children
let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were
never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one
morning to Snow-white: ‘Now I must go away, and cannot come back for the
whole summer.’ ‘Where are you going, then, dear bear?’ asked Snow-white.
‘I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again.’

Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unbolted the
door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to Snow-white
as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about
it. The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the
trees.

A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest
to get firewood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and
forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. When
they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping about like a dog
tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried: ‘Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?’ ‘What are you up to,
little man?’ asked Rose-red. ‘You stupid, prying goose!’ answered the
dwarf: ‘I was going to split the tree to get a little wood for cooking.
The little bit of food that we people get is immediately burnt up with
heavy logs; we do not swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had
just driven the wedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished;
but the cursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the
tree closed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white
beard; so now it is tight and I cannot get away, and the silly, sleek,
milk-faced things laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!’

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast. ‘I will run and fetch someone,’ said Rose-red. ‘You
senseless goose!’ snarled the dwarf; ‘why should you fetch someone? You
are already two too many for me; can you not think of something better?’
‘Don’t be impatient,’ said Snow-white, ‘I will help you,’ and she pulled
her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it
up, grumbling to himself: ‘Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine
beard. Bad luck to you!’ and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time afterwards Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish
of fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. ‘Where are you going?’ said
Rose-red; ‘you surely don’t want to go into the water?’ ‘I am not such
a fool!’ cried the dwarf; ‘don’t you see that the accursed fish wants
to pull me in?’ The little man had been sitting there fishing, and
unluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line; a
moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeble creature had not
strength to pull it out; the fish kept the upper hand and pulled the
dwarf towards him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it was of
little good, for he was forced to follow the movements of the fish, and
was in urgent danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast
together. There was nothing to do but to bring out the scissors and cut
the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that
he screamed out: ‘Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man’s
face? Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have
cut off the best part of it. I cannot let myself be seen by my people.
I wish you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!’ Then he took
out a sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without another word
he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led them
across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn about. There
they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round and
round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near a
rock not far away. Immediately they heard a loud, piteous cry. They ran
up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old acquaintance
the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried
with his shrill voice: ‘Could you not have done it more carefully! You
dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you
clumsy creatures!’ Then he took up a sack full of precious stones, and
slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls, who by
this time were used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did their
business in town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that anyone would come there so late. The evening
sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with
all colours so beautifully that the children stood still and stared
at them. ‘Why do you stand gaping there?’ cried the dwarf, and his
ashen-grey face became copper-red with rage. He was still cursing when a
loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards them out
of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could not reach
his cave, for the bear was already close. Then in the dread of his heart
he cried: ‘Dear Mr Bear, spare me, I will give you all my treasures;
look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my life; what do you
want with such a slender little fellow as I? you would not feel me
between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tender
morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy’s sake eat them!’ The
bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a single
blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called to them: ‘Snow-white and
Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you.’ Then they
recognized his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly
his bearskin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in
gold. ‘I am a king’s son,’ he said, ‘and I was bewitched by that wicked
dwarf, who had stolen my treasures; I have had to run about the forest
as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his
well-deserved punishment.

Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they
divided between them the great treasure which the dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.

THE FROG-KING; OR, IRON HENRY


In old times, when wishing was having, there lived a King whose
daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautiful that
the sun itself, which has seen so much, was astonished whenever it
shone in her face.

Close by the King’s castle lay a great dark forest, and under an old
lime-tree in the forest, was a fountain. When the day was very warm,
the King’s Child went out into the forest and sat down by the side of
the cool fountain, and when she was dull she took a golden ball, and
threw it up in the air and caught it. And this ball was her favorite
plaything.

Now, it so happened one day, the King’s Daughter’s golden ball did not
fall into the little hand which she was holding up for it, but on to
the ground, and rolled straight into the water. The King’s Daughter
followed it with her eyes; but it vanished, and the well was deep, so
deep that the bottom could not be seen. On this she began to cry, and
cried louder and louder, and could not be comforted.

And as she thus lamented, some one said to her, “What ails you, King’s
Daughter? You weep so that even a stone would show pity.”

She looked round to the side from whence the voice came, and saw
a Frog stretching its thick, ugly head from the water. “Ah! old
water-splasher, is it you?” said she; “I am weeping for my golden ball,
which has fallen into the fountain.”

“Be quiet, and do not weep,” answered the Frog, “I can help you. But
what will you give me if I bring your plaything up again?”

“Whatever you will have, dear Frog,” said she--“my clothes, my pearls
and jewels, and even the golden crown which I am wearing.”

The Frog answered, “I do not care for your clothes, your pearls and
jewels, or your golden crown, but if you will love me and let me be
your companion and playfellow, and sit by you at your little table, and
eat off your little golden plate, and drink out of your little cup, and
sleep in your little bed--if you will promise me this, I will go down
below, and bring your golden ball up again.”

“Oh, yes,” said she, “I promise you all you wish, if you will but bring
my ball back again.” She, however, thought, “How the silly Frog does
talk! He lives in the water with the other frogs and croaks, and can be
no companion to any human being!”

But the Frog, when he had received this promise, put his head into the
water and sank down. In a short time he came swimming up again with
the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the grass. The King’s Daughter
was delighted to see her pretty plaything once more, and picked it up,
and ran away with it.

“Wait, wait,” said the Frog. “Take me with you. I can’t run as you
can.” But what did it avail him to scream his _croak, croak,_ after
her, as loudly as he could? She did not listen to it, but ran home and
soon forgot the poor Frog, who was forced to go back into his fountain
again.

The next day, when she had seated herself at table with the King
and all the courtiers, and was eating from her little golden plate,
something came creeping _splish splash, splish splash,_ up the marble
staircase. When it got to the top, it knocked at the door, and cried:

    “_King’s Daughter, youngest.
          Open the door!_”

She ran to see who was outside, but when she opened the door, there sat
the Frog in front of it. Then she slammed the door in great haste, sat
down to dinner again, and was quite frightened.

The King saw plainly that her heart was beating violently, and said,
“My Child, what are you so afraid of? Is there a Giant outside who
wants to carry you away?”

“Ah, no,” replied she, “it is no Giant, but a disgusting Frog.”

“What does the Frog want with you?”

“Ah, dear Father, yesterday when I was in the forest sitting by the
fountain, playing, my golden ball fell into the water. And because I
cried so, the Frog brought it out again for me. And because he insisted
so on it, I promised him he should be my companion; but I never thought
he would be able to come out of the water! And now he is here, and
wants to come in.”

In the meantime, it knocked a second time, and cried:

    “_King’s Daughter, youngest!
          Open to me!
      Don’t you remember yesterday,
      And all that you to me did say,
      Beside the cooling fountain’s spray?
      King’s Daughter, youngest!
          Open to me!_”

Then said the King, “That which you have promised you must perform. Go
and let him in.”

She went and opened the door, and the Frog hopped in and followed her,
step by step, to her chair. There he sat still and cried, “Lift me up
beside you.”

She delayed, until at last the King commanded her to do it. When the
Frog was once on the chair, he wanted to be on the table, and when he
was on the table, he said, “Now, push your little golden plate nearer
to me that we may eat together.”

She did this, but it was easy to see that she did not do it willingly.
The Frog enjoyed what he ate, but almost every mouthful she took,
choked her.

At length he said, “I have eaten and am satisfied. Now I am tired,
carry me into your little room and make your little silken bed ready;
and we will both lie down and go to sleep.”

The King’s Daughter began to cry, for she was afraid of the cold Frog,
which she did not like to touch, and which was now to sleep in her
pretty, clean little bed.

But the King grew angry and said, “He who helped you when you were in
trouble, ought not afterward to be despised.”

So she took hold of the Frog with two fingers, carried him upstairs,
and put him in a corner. But when she was in bed, he crept to her and
said, “I am tired, I want to sleep as well as you; lift me up or I will
tell your father.”

Then she was terribly angry, and took him up and threw him with all her
might against the wall.

“Now, you will be quiet, odious Frog,” said she.

But when he fell down, he was no Frog but a King’s Son with beautiful
kind eyes!

He, by her father’s will, was now her dear companion and husband. Then
he told her how he had been bewitched by a wicked Witch, and how no
one could have delivered him from the fountain but herself, and that
to-morrow they would go together into his kingdom.

Then they went to sleep, and next morning when the sun awoke them, a
coach came rolling up drawn by eight white horses, with white ostrich
feathers on their heads. They were harnessed with golden chains, and
behind stood the young King’s servant, Faithful Henry. Faithful Henry
had been so unhappy when his master was changed into a Frog, that he
had three iron bands laid round his heart, lest it should burst with
grief and sadness.

The coach was to conduct the young King into his kingdom. Faithful
Henry helped them both in, and placed himself behind again, and was
full of joy because of this deliverance. And when they had driven
a part of the way, the King’s Son heard a cracking behind him as if
something had broken. So he turned round and cried:

    “_Henry, the coach does break!_”
    “_No, no, my lord, you do mistake!
      It is the band around my heart,
      That felt such great and bitter smart,
      When you were in the fountain strange,
      When you into a Frog were changed!_”

Again and once again, while they were on their way, something cracked;
and each time the King’s Son thought the carriage was breaking. But
it was only the bands which were springing from the heart of Faithful
Henry because his master was set free and was happy.




  

THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS


There was once on a time, an old Goat who had seven little Kids, and
loved them with all the love of a mother for her children.

One day, she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So
she called all seven to her and said, “Dear Children, I have to go
into the forest. Be on your guard against the Wolf. If he come in, he
will devour you all--skin, hair, and all. The wretch often disguises
himself; but you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black
feet.”

The Kids said, “Dear Mother, we will take good care of ourselves. You
may go away without any anxiety.”

Then the old one bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.

It was not long before some one knocked at the house-door, and cried,
“Open the door, dear Children! Your mother is here, and has brought
something back with her for each of you.”

But the little Kids knew that it was the Wolf, by his rough voice. “We
will not open the door,” cried they; “you are not our mother. She has
a soft, pleasant voice, but your voice is rough. You are the Wolf!”

Then the Wolf went away to a shopkeeper, and bought a great lump of
chalk, ate this and made his voice soft with it. Then he came back,
knocked at the door of the house, and cried, “Open the door, dear
Children! Your mother is here and has brought something back with her
for each of you.”

But the Wolf had laid his black paws against the window, and the
children saw them, and cried, “We will not open the door, our mother
has not black feet like you. You are the Wolf!”

Then the Wolf ran to a baker, and said, “I have hurt my feet, rub some
dough over them for me.”

And when the baker had rubbed his feet over, he ran to the miller and
said, “Strew some white meal over my feet for me.” The miller thought
to himself, “The Wolf wants to deceive some one,” and refused. But the
Wolf said, “If you will not do it, I will devour you.” Then the miller
was afraid, and made his paws white for him. Yes! so are men!

Now, the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knocked at
it, and said, “Open the door for me, Children! Your dear little mother
has come home, and has brought every one of you something from the
forest with her.”

The little Kids cried, “First show us your paws that we may know if you
are our dear little mother.”

Then he put his paws in through the window. And when the Kids saw that
they were white, they believed all that he said, and opened the door.
But who should come in but _the Wolf_!


They were terrified and wanted to hide themselves. One sprang under the
table, the second into the bed, the third into the stove, the fourth
into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, the sixth under the
washing-bowl, and the seventh into the clock-case. But the Wolf found
them all and made no delay, but swallowed one after the other down his
throat. The youngest in the clock-case was the only one he did not find.

When the Wolf had satisfied his appetite, he took himself off, laid
himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and began to
sleep.

Soon afterward, the old Goat came home again from the forest. Ah! what
a sight she saw there! The house-door stood wide open. The table,
chairs, and benches were thrown down, the washing-bowl lay broken to
pieces, and the quilts and pillows were pulled off the bed.

She sought her children, but they were nowhere to be found. She called
them one after another by name, but no one answered. At last, when she
called the youngest, a soft voice cried, “Dear Mother, I am in the
clock-case.”

She took the Kid out, and it told her that the Wolf had come and had
eaten all the others. Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor
children!

At length, in her grief she went out, and the youngest Kid ran with
her. When they came to the meadow, there lay the Wolf by the tree and
he was snoring so loud that the branches shook. She looked at him on
every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his
stomach. “Ah!” said she, “is it possible that my poor children, whom he
has swallowed down for his supper, can be still alive?”

Then the Kid had to run home and fetch scissors, and a needle and
thread, and the Goat cut open the monster’s stomach. Hardly had she
made one cut, than a little Kid thrust its head out, and when she had
cut farther, all six sprang out one after another, and were all still
alive, and had suffered no hurt whatever, for in his greediness the
monster had swallowed them whole.

What rejoicing there was! They embraced their dear mother, and jumped
like a tailor at his wedding. The mother, however, said, “Now go and
look for some big stones. We will fill the wicked beast’s stomach with
them, while he is asleep.”

Then the seven Kids dragged the stones thither with all speed, and put
as many of them into his stomach as they could get in. And the mother
sewed him up again in the greatest haste; so that he was not aware of
anything and never once stirred.

When the Wolf had had his sleep out, he got on his legs, and as the
stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, he wanted to go to a well
to drink. But when he began to walk and to move about, the stones in
his stomach knocked against each other and rattled. Then cried he:

    “_What rumbles and tumbles
      Against my poor bones?
      I thought ’twas six Kids,
      But it’s only big stones!_”

And when he got to the well and stooped over the water and was just
about to drink, the heavy stones made him fall in. There was no help
for it, but he had to drown miserably!

When the seven Kids saw that, they came running to the spot and cried
aloud, “The Wolf is dead! The Wolf is dead!” and danced for joy round
about the well with their mother.




  

RAPUNZEL


There was once a man and a woman, who had long in vain wished for a
child. At length, the woman hoped that God was about to grant her
desire.

These people had a little window at the back of their house from which
a splendid garden could be seen. It was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to a Witch, who had great
power and was dreaded by all the world.

One day, the woman was standing by this window and looking down
into the garden, when she saw a bed which was planted with the most
beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it looked so fresh and green that she
longed for it, and had the greatest desire to eat some.

This desire increased every day, and as she knew that she could not get
any of it, she quite pined away, and looked pale and miserable.

Then her husband was alarmed, and asked, “What ails you, dear Wife?”

“Ah,” she replied, “if I can’t get some of the rampion to eat, which is
in the garden behind our house, I shall die.”

The man, who loved her, thought, “Sooner than let your wife die, bring
her some of the rampion yourself, let it cost you what it will!”

In the twilight of evening, he clambered over the wall into the garden
of the Witch, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to
his wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it with much
relish.

She, however, liked it so much--so very much--that the next day she
longed for it three times as much as before. If he was to have any
rest, her husband must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom
of evening, therefore, he let himself down again. But when he had
clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the Witch
standing before him.

“How dare you,” said she with angry look, “descend into my garden and
steal my rampion like a thief? You shall suffer for it!”

“Ah,” answered he, “let mercy take the place of justice! I had to do it
out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the window, and felt
such a longing for it that she would have died, if she had not got some
to eat.”

Then the Witch let her anger be softened, and said to him, “If the case
be as you say, I will allow you to take away with you as much rampion
as you will, only I make one condition, you must give me the child
which your wife will bring into the world. It shall be well treated,
and I will care for it like a mother.”

The man in his terror consented to everything, and when the woman at
last had a little daughter, the Witch appeared at once, gave the child
the name of Rapunzel, and took it away with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child beneath the sun. When she
was twelve years old, the Witch shut her into a tower, which lay in
a forest, and had neither stairs nor door. But quite at the top was
a little window. When the Witch wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath this, and cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair._”

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the Witch, she unfastened her braided tresses and
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above. And then the
hair fell twenty ells down, and the Witch climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the King’s Son rode through
the forest and went by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in
her solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound.

The King’s Son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of
the tower, but none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had
so deeply touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest
and listened to it.

Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw that a Witch came
there, and he heard how she cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair._”

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the Witch climbed up
to her.

“If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I will for once try my
fortune,” said he.

The next day when it began to grow dark, he went to the tower and cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair._”

Immediately the hair fell down, and the King’s Son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such as her eyes
had never yet beheld, came to her. But the King’s Son began to talk
to her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so
stirred, that it had let him have no rest, so he had been forced to see
her.

Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take
him for her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she
thought, “He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does;” and she said
yes, and laid her hand in his.

She said also, “I will willingly go away with you, but I do not know
how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk every time that you
come, and I will weave a ladder with it. When that is ready I will
descend, and you will take me on your horse.”

They agreed that until that time, he should come to her every evening,
for the old woman came by day. The Witch remarked nothing of this,
until once Rapunzel said to her, “Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens
that you are so much heavier for me to draw up, than the young King’s
Son--he is with me in a moment.”

“Ah! you wicked Child!” cried the Witch. “What do I hear you say!
I thought I had separated you from all the world, and yet you have
deceived me!”

In her anger she clutched Rapunzel’s beautiful tresses, wrapped them
twice round her left hand, seized a pair of scissors with the right,
and _snip, snap,_ they were cut off, and the lovely braids lay on the
ground. And she was so pitiless that she took poor Rapunzel into a
desert, where she had to live in great grief and misery.

On the same day, however, that she cast out Rapunzel, the Witch, in the
evening, fastened the braids of hair which she had cut off, to the hook
of the window; and when the King’s Son came and cried:

    “_Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
      Let down thy hair,_”

she let the hair down.

The King’s Son ascended. He did not find his dearest Rapunzel above,
but the Witch, who gazed at him with wicked and venomous looks.

“Aha!” she cried mockingly, “you would fetch your dearest! But the
beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest. The cat has got it,
and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is lost to you! You
will never see her more!”

The King’s Son was beside himself with grief and in his despair he
leapt down from the tower. He escaped with his life, but the thorns
into which he fell, pierced his eyes. Then he wandered quite blind
about the forest, ate nothing but roots and berries, and did nothing
but lament and weep over the loss of his dearest wife.

Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and at length came to
the desert where Rapunzel lived in wretchedness. He heard a voice,
and it seemed so familiar to him that he went toward it. When he
approached, Rapunzel knew him, and fell on his neck and wept. Two of
her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clear again, and he could see
with them as before.

He led her to his Kingdom where he was joyfully received, and they
lived for a long time, happy and contented.




  

LITTLE BROTHER AND LITTLE SISTER


Little brother took his little sister by the hand and said, “Since our
mother died, we have had no happiness; our stepmother beats us every
day, and if we come near her, she kicks us away with her foot. Our
meals are the hard crusts of bread that are left over. The little dog
under the table is better off, for she often throws it a nice bit.
May Heaven pity us! If our mother only knew! Come, we will go forth
together into the wide world.”

They walked the whole day over meadows, fields, and stony places; and
when it rained the little sister said, “Heaven and our hearts are
weeping together.”

In the evening they came to a large forest, and they were so weary with
sorrow and hunger and the long walk, that they lay down in a hollow
tree and fell asleep.

The next day when they awoke, the sun was already high and shone down
hot into the tree. Then the little brother said, “Little Sister, I
am thirsty. If I knew of a little brook I would go and take a drink.
I think I hear one running.” The little brother got up and took the
little sister by the hand, and they set off to find the brook.

But the wicked stepmother was a Witch, and had seen how the two
children had gone away. She had crept after them, as Witches do creep,
and had bewitched all the brooks in the forest.

Now, when they found a little brook leaping brightly over the stones,
the little brother was going to drink out of it, but the little sister
heard how it said as it ran:

    “_Who drinks of me, a Tiger be!
      Who drinks of me, a Tiger be!_”

Then the little sister cried, “Pray, dear little Brother, do not drink,
or you will become a wild beast, and tear me to pieces.”

The little brother did not drink, although he was so thirsty, but said,
“I will wait for the next spring.”

When they came to the next brook, the little sister heard this say:

    “_Who drinks of me, a wild Wolf be!
      Who drinks of me, a wild Wolf be!_”

Then the little sister cried out, “Pray, dear little Brother, do not
drink, or you will become a Wolf, and devour me.”

The little brother did not drink, and said, “I will wait until we come
to the next spring, but then I must drink, say what you like; for my
thirst is too great.”

And when they came to the third brook, the little sister heard how it
said as it ran:

    “_Who drinks of me, a Roebuck be!
      Who drinks of me, a Roebuck be!_”

The little sister said, “Oh, I pray you, dear little Brother, do not
drink, or you will become a Roe, and run away from me.”

But the little brother had knelt by the brook, and had bent down and
drunk some of the water. And as soon as the first drops touched his
lips, he lay there a young Roe.

And now the little sister wept over her poor bewitched little brother,
and the little Roe wept also, and sat sorrowfully near to her. But at
last the girl said, “Be quiet, dear little Roe, I will never, never
leave you.”

Then she untied her golden garter and put it round the Roe’s neck, and
she plucked rushes and wove them into a soft cord. With this she tied
the little animal and led it on; and she walked deeper and deeper into
the forest.

And when they had gone a very long way, they came to a little house.
The girl looked in; and as it was empty, she thought, “We can stay here
and live.”

Then she sought for leaves and moss to make a soft bed for the Roe.
Every morning she went out and gathered roots and berries and nuts for
herself, and brought tender grass for the Roe, who ate out of her hand,
and was content and played round about her. In the evening, when the
little sister was tired, and had said her prayer, she laid her head
upon the Roe’s back: that was her pillow, and she slept softly on it.
And if only the little brother had had his human form, it would have
been a delightful life.

For some time, they were alone like this in the wilderness. But it
happened that the King of the country held a great hunt in the forest.
Then the blasts of the horns, the barking of dogs, and the merry shouts
of the huntsmen rang through the trees, and the Roe heard all, and was
only too anxious to be there.

“Oh,” said he to his little sister, “let me be off to the hunt, I
cannot bear it any longer;” and he begged so much that at last she
agreed.

“But,” said she to him, “come back to me in the evening. I must shut
my door for fear of the rough huntsmen, so knock and say, ‘My little
Sister, let me in!’ that I may know you. And if you do not say that, I
shall not open the door.”

Then the young Roe sprang away; so happy was he and so merry in the
open air.

The King and the huntsmen saw the pretty creature, and started after
him. But they could not catch him, and when they thought that they
surely had him, away he sprang through the bushes and was gone.

When it was dark he ran to the cottage, knocked, and said, “My little
Sister, let me in.” Then the door was opened for him, and he jumped in,
and rested himself the whole night through upon his soft bed.

The next day, the hunt went on afresh, and when the Roe again heard the
bugle-horn, and the _ho! ho!_ of the huntsmen, he had no peace, but
said, “Sister, let me out, I must be off.”

His sister opened the door for him, and said, “But you must be here
again in the evening and say your password.”

When the King and his huntsmen again saw the young Roe with the golden
collar, they all chased him, but he was too quick and nimble for
them. This went on for the whole day, but by evening the huntsmen had
surrounded him, and one of them wounded him a little in the foot, so
that he limped and ran slowly. Then a hunter crept after him to the
cottage and heard how he said, “My little Sister, let me in,” and saw
that the door was opened for him, and was shut again at once.

The huntsman took notice of it all, and went to the King and told him
what he had seen and heard. Then the King said, “To-morrow we will hunt
once more.”

The little sister, however, was dreadfully frightened when she saw that
her little Roe was hurt. She washed the blood off him, laid herbs on
the wound, and said, “Go to your bed, dear Roe, that you may get well
again.”

But the wound was so slight that the Roe, next morning, did not feel it
any more. And when he again heard the sport outside, he said, “I cannot
bear it, I must be there. They shall not find it so easy to catch me!”

The little sister cried, and said, “This time they will kill you, and
here am I alone in the forest, and forsaken by all the world. I will
not let you out.”

“Then you will have me die of grief,” answered the Roe. “When I hear
the bugle-horns I feel as if I must jump out of my skin.”

Then the little sister could not do otherwise, but opened the door for
him with a heavy heart, and the Roe, full of health and joy, bounded
away into the forest.

When the King saw him, he said to his huntsman, “Now chase him all day
long till nightfall, but take care that no one does him any harm.”

As soon as the sun had set, the King said to the huntsmen, “Now come
and show me the cottage in the wood;” and when he was at the door,
he knocked and called out, “Dear little Sister, let me in.”

Then the door opened, and the King walked in, and there stood a maiden
more lovely than any he had ever seen. The maiden was frightened when
she saw, not her little Roe, but a man with a golden crown upon his
head. But the King looked kindly at her, stretched out his hand, and
said:

“Will you go with me to my palace and be my dear wife?”



“Yes, indeed,” answered the maiden, “but the little Roe must go with
me. I cannot leave him.”

The King said, “He shall stay with you as long as you live, and shall
want nothing.”

Just then he came running in, and the little sister again tied him with
the cord of rushes, took it in her own hand, and went away with the
King from the cottage.

The King took the lovely maiden upon his horse and carried her to his
palace, where the wedding was held with great pomp. She was now the
Queen, and they lived for a long time happily together. The Roe was
tended and cherished, and ran about in the palace-garden.

But the wicked Witch, because of whom the children had gone out into
the world, thought all the time that the little sister had been torn to
pieces by the wild beasts in the wood, and that the little brother had
been shot for a Roe by the huntsmen. Now when she heard that they were
so happy, and so well off, envy and hatred rose in her heart and left
her no peace, and she thought of nothing but how she could bring them
again to misfortune.

Her own daughter, who was as ugly as night, and had only one eye,
grumbled at her and said, “A Queen! that ought to have been my luck.”

“Only be quiet,” answered the old woman, and comforted her by saying,
“when the time comes I shall be ready.”

As time went on, the Queen had a pretty little boy. It happened that
the King was out hunting; so the old Witch took the form of the
chambermaid, went into the room where the Queen lay, and said to her,
“Come, the bath is ready. It will do you good, and give you fresh
strength. Make haste before it gets cold.”

The daughter also was close by; so they carried the weak Queen into the
bathroom, and put her into the bath. Then they shut the door and ran
away. But in the bathroom they had made a fire of such deadly heat,
that the beautiful young Queen was soon suffocated.

When this was done, the old woman took her daughter, put a nightcap on
her head, and laid her in bed in place of the Queen. She gave her too
the shape and the look of the Queen, only she could not make good the
lost eye. But, in order that the King might not see it, she was to lie
on the side on which she had no eye.

In the evening, when he came home and heard that he had a son, he was
heartily glad, and was going to the bed of his dear wife to see how she
was. But the old woman quickly called out, “For your life leave the
curtains closed. The Queen ought not to see the light yet, and must
have rest.”

The King went away, and did not find out that a false Queen was lying
in the bed.

But at midnight, when all slept, the nurse, who was sitting in the
nursery by the cradle, and who was the only person awake, saw the door
open and the true Queen walk in. She took the child out of the cradle,
laid it on her arm and nursed it. Then she shook up its pillow, laid
the child down again, and covered it with the little quilt. And she did
not forget the Roe, but went into the corner where he lay, and stroked
his back. Then she went quite silently out of the door again.

The next morning, the nurse asked the guards whether any one had come
into the palace during the night, but they answered, “No, we have seen
no one.”

She came thus many nights and never spoke a word. The nurse always saw
her, but she did not dare to tell any one about it.

When some time had passed in this manner, the Queen began to speak in
the night, and said:

    “_How fares my child, how fares my Roe?
      Twice shall I come, then never moe!_”

The nurse did not answer, but when the Queen had gone again, went to
the King and told him all.

The King said, “Ah, heavens! what is this? To-morrow night I will watch
by the child.”

In the evening he went into the nursery, and at midnight the Queen
again appeared, and said:

    “_How fares my child, how fares my Roe?
      Once shall I come, then never moe!_”

And she nursed the child as she was wont to do before she disappeared.
The King dared not speak to her, but on the next night he watched
again. Then she said:

    “_How fares my child, How fares my Roe?
      This time I come, then never moe!_”

At that the King could not restrain himself. He sprang toward her, and
said, “You can be none other than my dear wife.”

She answered, “Yes, I am your dear wife,” and at the same moment she
received life again, and by God’s grace became fresh, rosy, and full of
health.

Then she told the King the evil deed which the wicked Witch and her
daughter had been guilty of toward her. The King ordered both to be led
before the judge, and judgment was delivered against them. The daughter
was taken into the forest where she was torn to pieces by wild beasts,
but the Witch was cast into the fire and miserably burnt.

And as soon as she was burnt the Roe changed his shape, and received
his human form again. So the little sister and little brother lived
happily together all their lives.




  

THE STAR-MONEY


There was once on a time, a little girl whose father and mother were
dead. She was so poor that she no longer had any little room to live
in, or bed to sleep in. At last, she had nothing else but the clothes
she was wearing and a little bit of bread in her hand which some
charitable soul had given her. She was, however, good and pious.

And as she was thus forsaken by all the world, she went forth into the
open country, trusting in the good God.

Then a poor man met her, who said, “Ah, give me something to eat, I am
so hungry!”

She reached him the whole of her piece of bread, and said, “May God
bless it to your use,” and went onward.

Then came a child who moaned and said, “My head is so cold, give me
something to cover it with.”

So she took off her hood and gave it to him.

And when she had walked a little farther, she met another child who had
no jacket and was frozen with cold. Then she gave it her own.

A little farther on one begged for a frock, and she gave away that also.

At length, she got into a forest and it had already become dark, and
there came yet another child, and asked for a little shirt. The good
little girl thought to herself, “It is a dark night and no one sees me.
I can very well give my little shirt away,” and took it off, and gave
away that also.

And she so stood, and had not one single thing left. Then suddenly some
Stars from heaven fell down, and they were nothing else but hard smooth
pieces of money! And although she had just given her little shirt away,
lo! she had a new one which was of the very finest linen.

Then she gathered together the money into this, and was rich all the
days of her life.




  

THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE


There was once on a time, a Fisherman who lived with his wife in a
miserable hovel close by the sea, and every day he went out fishing.
And once, as he was sitting with his rod, looking at the clear water,
his line suddenly went down, far down below, and when he drew it up
again, he brought out a large Flounder.

Then the Flounder said to him: “Hark, you Fisherman, I pray you, let me
live. I am no Flounder really, but an enchanted Prince. What good will
it do you to kill me? I should not be good to eat. Put me in the water
again, and let me go.”

“Come,” said the Fisherman, “there is no need for so many words about
it--a fish that can talk I should certainly let go, anyhow.”

With that he put him back again into the clear water, and the Flounder
went to the bottom, leaving a long streak of blood behind him. Then the
Fisherman got up and went home to his wife in the hovel.

“Husband,” said the woman, “have you caught nothing to-day?”

“No,” said the man, “I did catch a Flounder, who said he was an
enchanted Prince, so I let him go again.”

“Did you not wish for anything first?” said the woman.

“No,” said the man; “what should I wish for?”

“Ah,” said the woman, “it is surely hard to have to live always in
this dirty hovel. You might have wished for a small cottage for us. Go
back and call him. Tell him we want to have a small cottage. He will
certainly give us that.”

“Ah,” said the man, “why should I go there again?”

“Why,” said the woman, “you did catch him, and you let him go again. He
is sure to do it. Go at once.”

The man still did not quite like to go, but did not want to oppose his
wife, and went to the sea.

When he got there the sea was all green and yellow, and no longer
smooth. So he stood and said:

    “_Flounder, Flounder in the sea,
      Come, I pray thee, here to me;
      For my wife, Dame Ilsabil,
      Wills not as I’d have her will._”

Then the Flounder came swimming to him and said, “Well, what does she
want, then?”

“Ah,” said the man, “I did catch you, and my wife says I really ought
to have wished for something. She does not like to live in a wretched
hovel any longer. She would like to have a cottage.”

“Go, then,” said the Flounder, “she has it already.”

When the man got home, his wife was no longer in the hovel. But instead
of it, there stood a small cottage, and she was sitting on a bench
before the door. Then she took him by the hand and said to him, “Just
come inside, look. Now isn’t this a great deal better?”

So they went in, and there was a small porch, and a pretty little
parlor and bedroom, and a kitchen and pantry, with the best of
furniture, and fitted up with the most beautiful things made of tin and
brass, whatsoever was wanted. And behind the cottage, there was a small
yard, with hens and ducks, and a little garden with flowers and fruit.

“Look,” said the wife, “is not that nice!”

“Yes,” said the husband, “and so we must always think it,--now we will
live quite contented.”

“We will think about that,” said the wife.

With that they ate something and went to bed.

Everything went well for a week or a fortnight, and then the woman
said, “Hark you, Husband, this cottage is far too small for us, and the
garden and yard are little. The Flounder might just as well have given
us a larger house. I should like to live in a great stone castle. Go to
the Flounder, and tell him to give us a castle.”

“Ah, Wife,” said the man, “the cottage is quite good enough. Why should
we live in a castle?”

“What!” said the woman; “go at once, the Flounder can always do that.”

“No, Wife,” said the man, “the Flounder has just given us the cottage.
I do not like to go back so soon, it might make him angry.”

“Go,” said the woman, “he can do it quite easily, and will be glad to
do it. Just you go to him.”

The man’s heart grew heavy, and he did not wish to go. He said to
himself, “It is not right,” and yet he went.

And when he came to the sea, the water was quite purple and dark-blue,
and gray and thick, and no longer green and yellow, but it was still
quiet. And he stood there and said:

    “_Flounder, Flounder in the sea,
      Come, I pray thee, here to me;
      For my wife, Dame Ilsabil,
      Wills not as I’d have her will._”

“Well, what does she want, now?” said the Flounder.

“Alas,” said the man, half scared, “she wants to live in a great stone
castle.”

“Go to it, then, she is standing before the door,” said the Flounder.

Then the man went home, and when he got there, he found a great stone
palace, and his wife was just standing on the steps going in. She took
him by the hand and said, “Come in.”

So he went with her, and in the castle was a great hall paved with
marble, and many servants, who flung wide the doors. The walls were all
bright with beautiful hangings, and in the rooms were chairs and tables
of pure gold. Crystal chandeliers hung from the ceiling, and all the
rooms and bedrooms had carpets. Food and wine of the very best were
standing on all the tables, so that they nearly broke down beneath it.

Behind the house, too, there was a great courtyard, with stables
for horses and cows, and the very best of carriages. There was a
magnificent large garden, too, with the most beautiful flowers and
fruit-trees, and a park quite half a mile long, in which were stags,
deer, and hares, and everything that could be desired.

“Come,” said the woman, “isn’t that beautiful?”

“Yes, indeed,” said the man, “now let it be; and we will live in this
beautiful castle and be content.”

“We will consider about that,” said the woman, “and sleep upon it;”
thereupon they went to bed.

Next morning, the wife awoke first. It was just daybreak, and from her
bed she saw the beautiful country lying before her. Her husband was
still stretching himself, so she poked him in the side with her elbow,
and said, “Get up, Husband, and just peep out of the window. Look you,
couldn’t we be the King over all that land? Go to the Flounder, we will
be the King.”

“Ah, Wife,” said the man, “why should we be King? I do not want to be
King.”

“Well,” said the wife, “if you won’t be King, I will. Go to the
Flounder, for I will be King.”

“Ah, Wife,” said the man, “why do you want to be King? I do not like to
say that to him.”

“Why not?” said the woman; “go to him at once. I must be King!”

So the man went, and was quite unhappy because his wife wished to be
King. “It is not right; it is not right,” thought he. He did not wish
to go, but yet he went.

And when he came to the sea, it was quite dark-gray, and the water
heaved up from below, and smelt putrid. Then he went and stood by it,
and said:

    “_Flounder, Flounder in the sea,
      Come, I pray thee, here to me;
      For my wife, Dame Ilsabil,
      Wills not as I’d have her will._”

“Well, what does she want, now?” said the Flounder.

“Alas,” said the man, “she wants to be King.”

“Go to her; she is King already.”

So the man went, and when he came to the palace, the castle had
become much larger, and had a great tower and magnificent ornaments.
The sentinel was standing before the door, and there were numbers of
soldiers with kettledrums and trumpets. And when he went inside the
house, everything was of real marble and gold, with velvet covers and
great golden tassels. Then the doors of the hall were opened, and there
was the Court in all its splendor, and his wife was sitting on a high
throne of gold and diamonds, with a great crown of gold on her head,
and a sceptre of pure gold and jewels in her hand. On both sides of
her, stood her maids-in-waiting in a row, each of them always one head
shorter than the last.

Then he went and stood before her, and said, “Ah, Wife, and now you are
King.”

“Yes,” said the woman, “now I am King.”

So he stood and looked at her, and when he had looked at her thus for
some time, he said, “And now that you are King, let all else be, we
will wish for nothing more.”

“Nay, Husband,” said the woman, quite anxiously, “I find time pass
very heavily, I can bear it no longer. Go to the Flounder--I am King,
but I must be Emperor, too.”

“Alas, Wife, why do you wish to be Emperor?”

“Husband,” said she, “go to the Flounder. I will be Emperor.”

“Alas, Wife,” said the man, “he cannot make you Emperor. I may not say
that to the fish. There is only one Emperor in the land. An Emperor,
the Flounder cannot make you! I assure you he cannot.”

“What!” said the woman, “I am the King, and you are nothing but my
husband. Will you go this moment? go at once! If he can make a King, he
can make an Emperor. I will be Emperor. Go instantly.”

So he was forced to go. As the man went, however, he was troubled in
mind, and thought to himself, “It will not end well! It will not end
well! Emperor is too shameless! The Flounder will at last be tired out.”

With that, he reached the sea, and the sea was quite black and thick,
and began to boil up from below, so that it threw up bubbles. And such
a sharp wind blew over it that it curdled, and the man was afraid. Then
he went and stood by it, and said:

    “_Flounder, Flounder in the sea,
      Come, I pray thee, here to me;
      For my wife, Dame Ilsabil,
      Wills not as I’d have her will._”

“Well, what does she want, now?” said the Flounder.

“Alas, Flounder,” said he, “my wife wants to be Emperor.”

“Go to her,” said the Flounder; “she is Emperor already.”

So the man went, and when he got there the whole palace was made of
polished marble with alabaster figures and golden ornaments. And
soldiers were marching before the door blowing trumpets, and beating
cymbals and drums. In the house, barons, and counts, and dukes were
going about as servants. Then they opened the doors to him, which were
of pure gold. And when he entered, there sat his wife on a throne,
which was made of one piece of gold, and was quite two miles high;
and she wore a great golden crown that was three yards high, and set
with diamonds and carbuncles. In one hand she had the sceptre, and in
the other the imperial orb. And on both sides of her stood the yeomen
of the guard in two rows, each being smaller than the one before him,
from the biggest Giant, who was two miles high, to the very smallest
Dwarf, just as big as my little finger. And before it stood a number of
princes and dukes.

Then the man went and stood among than, and said, “Wife, are you
Emperor now?”

“Yes,” said she, “now I am Emperor.”

Then he stood and looked at her well, and when he had looked at her
thus for some time, he said, “Ah, Wife, be content, now that you are
Emperor.”

“Husband,” said she, “why are you standing there? Now, I am Emperor,
but I will be Pope too. Go to the Flounder.”

“Alas, Wife,” said the man, “what will you not wish for? You cannot be
Pope. There is but one in Christendom. He cannot make you Pope.”

“Husband,” said she, “I will be Pope. Go immediately. I must be Pope
this very day.”



“No, Wife,” said the man, “I do not like to say that to him; that would
not do, it is too much. The Flounder can’t make you Pope.”

“Husband,” said she, “what nonsense! if he can make an Emperor he can
make a Pope. Go to him directly. I am Emperor, and you are nothing but
my husband. Will you go at once?”

Then he was afraid and went. But he was quite faint, and shivered and
shook, and his knees and legs trembled. And a high wind blew over the
land, and the clouds flew, and toward evening all grew dark, and the
leaves fell from the trees, and the water rose and roared as if it were
boiling, and splashed upon the shore. In the distance he saw ships
which were firing guns in their sore need, pitching and tossing on the
waves. And yet in the midst of the sky, there was still a small bit of
blue, though on every side it was as red as in a heavy storm. So, full
of despair, he went and stood in much fear, and said:

    “_Flounder, Flounder in the sea,
      Come, I pray thee, here to me;
      For my wife, Dame Ilsabil,
      Wills not as I’d have her will._”

“Well, what does she want, now?” said the Flounder.

“Alas,” said the man, “she wants to be Pope.”

“Go to her then,” said the Flounder; “she is Pope already.”

<p>So he went, and when he got there, he saw what seemed to be a large
church surrounded by palaces. He pushed his way through the crowd.
Inside, however, everything was lighted with thousands and thousands of
candles, and his wife was clad in gold, and she was sitting on a much
higher throne, and had three great golden crowns on, and round about
her there was much churchly splendor. And on both sides of her was a
row of candles, the largest of which was as tall as the very tallest
tower, down to the very smallest kitchen candle; and all the emperors
and kings were on their knees before her, kissing her shoe.

“Wife,” said the man, and looked attentively at her, “are you now Pope?”

“Yes,” said she, “I am Pope.”

So he stood and looked at her, and it was just as if he was looking at
the bright sun. When he had stood looking at her thus for a short time,
he said, “Ah, Wife, if you are Pope, do let well alone!”

But she looked as stiff as a post, and did not move or show any signs
of life. Then said he, “Wife, now that you are Pope, be satisfied, you
cannot become anything greater.”

“I will consider about that,” said the woman.

Thereupon they both went to bed. But she was not satisfied, and
greediness let her have no sleep, for she was continually thinking what
there was left for her to be.

The man slept well and soundly, for he had run about a great deal
during the day. But the woman could not fall asleep at all, and flung
herself from one side to the other the whole night through, thinking
what more was left for her to be, but unable to call to mind anything
else.

At length the sun began to rise, and when the woman saw the red of
dawn, she sat up in bed and looked at it. And when, through the window,
she saw the sun thus rising, she said, “Cannot I, too, order the sun
and moon to rise?”

“Husband,” said she, poking him in the ribs with her elbows, “wake up!
go to the Flounder, for I wish to be even as God is.”

The man was still half asleep, but he was so horrified that he fell out
of bed. He thought he must have heard amiss, and rubbed his eyes, and
said, “Alas, Wife, what are you saying?”

“Husband,” said she, “if I can’t order the sun and moon to rise, and
have to look on and see the sun and moon rising, I can’t bear it. I
shall not know what it is to have another happy hour, unless I can make
them rise myself.” Then she looked at him so terribly that a shudder
ran over him, and said, “Go at once. I wish to be like unto God.”

“Alas, Wife,” said the man, falling on his knees before her, “the
Flounder cannot do that. He can make an Emperor and a Pope. I beseech
you, go on as you are, and be Pope.”

Then she fell into a rage, and her hair flew wildly about her head, and
she cried, “I will not endure this, I’ll not bear it any longer. Will
you go?” Then he put on his trousers and ran away like a madman.

But outside a great storm was raging, and blowing so hard that he
could scarcely keep his feet. Houses and trees toppled over, mountains
trembled, rocks rolled into the sea, the sky was pitch black, and it
thundered and lightened. And the sea came in with black waves as high
as church-towers and mountains, and all with crests of white foam at
the top. Then he cried, but could not hear his own words:

    “_Flounder, Flounder in the sea,
      Come, I pray thee, here to me;
      For my wife, Dame Ilsabil,
      Wills not as I’d have her will._”

“Well; what does she want, now?” said the Flounder.

“Alas,” said he, “she wants to be like unto God.”

“Go to her, and you will find her back again in the dirty hovel.”

And there they are living at this very time.




  

THE WHITE SNAKE


A long time ago, there lived a King who was famed for his wisdom
through all the land. Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemed as if
news of the most secret things was brought to him through the air.

But he had a strange custom. Every day after dinner, when the table was
cleared, and no one else was present, a trusty servant had to bring him
one more dish. It was covered and even the servant did not know what
was in it. Neither did any one know, for the King never took off the
cover to eat of it, until he was quite alone.

This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, who took
away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that he could not help
carrying the dish into his room. When he had carefully locked the door,
he lifted up the cover, and saw a White Snake lying on the dish. But
when he saw it, he could not deny himself the pleasure of tasting it,
so he cut off a little bit and put it into his mouth.

No sooner had it touched his tongue than he heard a strange whispering
of little voices outside his window. He went and listened, and then
noticed that it was the sparrows who were chattering together, and
telling one another of all kinds of things which they had seen in the
fields and woods. Eating the Snake had given him power to understand
the language of animals!

Now, it so happened, that on this very day the Queen lost her most
beautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon this trusty
servant, who was allowed to go everywhere. The King ordered the man to
be brought before him, and threatened with angry words that unless he
could, before the morrow, point out the thief, he himself should be
looked upon as guilty and should be executed. In vain, he declared his
innocence. He was dismissed with no better answer.

In his trouble and fear, he went down into the courtyard, and took
thought how to help himself out of his trouble. Now some ducks were
sitting together quietly by a brook and taking their rest. And, whilst
they were making their feathers smooth with their bills, they were
having a confidential conversation. The servant stood by and listened.

They were telling one another of all the places where they had been
waddling about all the morning, and what good food they had found. And
one said in a pitiful tone, “Something lies heavy on my stomach; as
I was eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under the Queen’s
window.”

The servant at once seized her by the neck, carried her to the kitchen,
and said to the cook, “Here is a fine duck. Pray kill her.”

“Yes,” said the cook, and weighed her in his hand; “she has spared
no trouble to fatten herself, and has been waiting long enough to be
roasted.”

So he cut off her head; and as she was being dressed for the spit, the
Queen’s ring was found inside her.

The servant could now easily prove his innocence. The King, to make
amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favor, and promised him the
best place in the Court. The servant refused everything, and asked only
for a horse and some money for traveling, as he had a mind to see the
world and go about a little. When his request was granted, he set out
on his way.

One day he came to a pond, where he saw three fishes caught in the
reeds and gasping for water. Now, though it is said that fishes are
dumb, he heard them lamenting that they must perish so miserably. As he
had a kind heart, he got off his horse and put the three prisoners back
into the water.

They quivered with delight, put out their heads, and cried to him, “We
will remember you, and repay you for saving us!”

He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard a voice in
the sand at his feet. He listened, and heard an Ant-King complain, “Why
cannot folk, with their clumsy beasts, keep off our bodies? That stupid
horse, with his heavy hoofs, has been treading down my people without
mercy!”

So he turned on to a side path and the Ant-King cried out to him, “We
will remember you---one good turn deserves another!”

The path led him into a wood, and there he saw two old ravens standing
by their nest, and throwing out their young ones. “Out with you, you
idle, good-for-nothing creatures!” cried they; “we cannot find food
for you any longer. You are big enough, and can provide for yourselves.”

But the poor young ravens lay upon the ground flapping their wings, and
crying, “Oh, what helpless chicks we are! We must shift for ourselves,
and yet we cannot fly! What can we do, but lie here and starve?”

So the good young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his
sword, and gave it to them for food. Then they came hopping up to it,
satisfied their hunger, and cried, “We will remember you--one good turn
deserves another!”

And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked a long way,
he came to a large city. There was a great noise and crowd in the
streets, and a man rode up on horseback, crying aloud, “The King’s
Daughter wants a husband. But whoever sues for her hand must perform a
hard task. If he does not succeed he will forfeit his life.”

Many had already made the attempt, but in vain. Nevertheless, when the
youth saw the King’s Daughter he was so overcome by her great beauty,
that he forgot all danger, went before the King, and declared himself a
suitor.

So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was cast into it. Then
the King ordered him to fetch this ring up from the bottom of the sea,
and added, “If you come up without it, you will be thrown in again and
again until you perish amid the waves.”

All the people grieved for the handsome youth; then they went away;
leaving him alone by the sea.



He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, when suddenly
he saw three fishes come swimming toward him. They were the very
fishes whose lives he had saved. The one in the middle held a mussel in
its mouth, which it laid on the shore at the youth’s feet. When he had
taken it up and opened it, there lay the gold ring in the shell. Full
of joy he took it to the King, and expected that he would grant him the
promised reward.

But when the proud Princess perceived that he was not her equal in
birth, she scorned him, and required him first to perform another
task. She went down into the garden and strewed with her own hands ten
sacksful of millet-seed on the grass.

Then she said, “To-morrow morning before sunrise these must be picked
up, and not a single grain be wanting.”

The youth sat down in the garden and considered how he might perform
this task. But he could think of nothing, and there he sat sorrowfully
awaiting the break of day, when he should be led to death. But as soon
as the first rays of the sun shone into the garden, he saw all the
ten sacks standing side by side, quite full, and not a single grain
was missing. The Ant-King had come in the night with thousands and
thousands of ants, and the grateful creatures had, by great industry,
picked up all the millet-seeds and gathered them into the sacks.

Presently, the King’s Daughter herself came down into the garden, and
was amazed to see that the young man had done the task she had given
him.

But she could not yet conquer her proud heart, and said, “Although he
has performed both the tasks, he shall not be my husband, until he has
brought me an apple from the Tree of Life.”

The youth did not know where the Tree of Life stood, but he set out,
and would have gone on forever, as long as his legs would carry him,
though he had no hope of finding it. After he had wandered through
three kingdoms, he came one evening to a wood, and lay down under a
tree to sleep.

But he heard a rustling in the branches, and a Golden Apple fell into
his hand. At the same time three ravens flew down to him, perched
themselves upon his knee, and said, “We are the three young ravens whom
you saved from starving. When we had grown big, and heard that you were
seeking the Golden Apple, we flew over the sea to the end of the world,
where the Tree of Life stands, and have brought you the apple.”

The youth, full of joy, set out homeward, and took the Golden Apple
to the King’s beautiful Daughter, who had now no more excuses left to
make. They cut the Apple of Life in two and ate it together; and then
her heart became full of love for him, and they lived to a great age in
undisturbed happiness.




  

HAENSEL AND GRETHEL


Hard by a great forest, dwelt a poor woodcutter with his wife and his
two children. The boy was called Haensel and the girl, Grethel. He had
little to bite and to break; and once when great scarcity fell on the
land, he could no longer procure daily bread.

Now, when he thought over this by night in his bed, and tossed about in
his anxiety, he groaned and said to his wife, “What is to become of us?
How are we to feed our poor children, when we no longer have anything
even for ourselves?”

“I’ll tell you what, Husband,” answered the woman, “early to-morrow
morning we will take the children out into the forest to where it is
the thickest; there we will light a fire for them, and give each of
them one piece of bread more. Then we will go to our work and leave
them alone. They will not find the way home again, and we shall be rid
of them.”

“No, Wife,” said the man, “I will not do that. How can I bear to leave
my children alone in the forest?--the wild animals would soon come and
tear them to pieces.”

“Oh, you fool!” said she. “Then we must all four die of hunger. You may
as well plane the planks for our coffins.”

And she left him no peace until he consented. “But I feel very sorry
for the poor children, all the same,” said the man.

The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, and had
heard what the woman had said to their father.

Grethel wept bitter tears, and said to Haensel, “Now all is over with
us.”

“Be quiet, Grethel,” said Haensel, “do not distress yourself, I will
soon find a way to help us.”

And when the old folk had fallen asleep, he got up, put on his little
coat, opened the door below, and crept outside. The moon shone
brightly, and the white pebbles, which lay in front of the house,
glittered like real silver pennies. Haensel stooped and put as many of
them in the little pocket of his coat as he could possibly get in.

Then he went back and said to Grethel, “Be comforted, dear little
Sister, and sleep in peace. God will not forsake us,” and he lay down
again in his bed.

When day dawned, but before the sun had risen, the woman came and awoke
the two children, saying, “Get up, you sluggards! we are going into the
forest to fetch wood.” She gave each a little piece of bread, and said,
“There is something for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then,
for you will get nothing else.”

Grethel took the bread under her apron, as Haensel had the stones in
his pocket. Then they all set out together on the way to the forest.
When they had walked a short time, Haensel stood still and peeped
back, and did so again and again while he was throwing the white
pebble-stones one by one out of his pocket onto the road.

When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said, “Now,
Children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that you may not
be cold.”

Haensel and Grethel gathered brushwood together, as high as a little
hill. The brushwood was lighted, and when the flames were burning very
high, the woman said, “Now, Children, lay yourselves down by the fire
and rest. We will go into the forest and cut some wood. When we have
done, we will come back and fetch you away.”

Haensel and Grethel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each ate a
little piece of bread; and, as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe,
they believed that their father was near. It was, however, not the axe,
it was a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind
was blowing backward and forward. And as they had been sitting such a
long time, their eyes shut with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep.

When at last they awoke, it was already dark night. Grethel began to cry
and said, “How are we to get out of the forest now?”

But Haensel comforted her, and said, “Just wait a little, until the
moon has risen, and then we shall soon find the way.”

And when the full moon had risen, Haensel took his little sister by the
hand, and followed the pebbles which shone like newly-coined silver
pieces, and showed them the way.

They walked the whole night long, and, by break of day, came once more
to their father’s house. They knocked at the door; and when the woman
opened it and saw that it was Haensel and Grethel, she said, “You
naughty children, why have you slept so long in the forest?--we thought
you were never coming back at all!”

The father, however, rejoiced, for it had cut him to the heart to leave
them behind alone.

Not long afterward, there was another famine in all parts, and
the children heard their mother saying at night to their father,
“Everything is eaten again, we have one-half loaf left, and after that
there is an end. The children must go, we will take them farther into
the wood, so that they will not find their way out again. There is no
other means of saving ourselves!”

The man’s heart was heavy, and he thought “it would be better for you
to share the last mouthful with your children!” The woman, however,
would listen to nothing that he had to say, but scolded and reproached
him. He who says A must say B, likewise, and as he had yielded the
first time, he had to do so a second time also.

The children were, however, still awake and had heard the conversation.
When the old folk were asleep, Haensel again got up to go out and pick
up pebbles. But the woman had locked the door, and Haensel could not
get out. Nevertheless he comforted his little sister, and said, “Do not
cry, Grethel, go to sleep quietly, the good God will help us.”

Early in the morning, came the woman, and took the children out of
their beds. Their bit of bread was given to them, but it was still
smaller than the time before. On the way into the forest, Haensel
crumbled his in his pocket, and often stood still and threw a morsel on
the ground, and little by little, threw all the crumbs on the path.

The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where they had
never in their lives been before. Then a great fire was again made, and
the mother said, “Just sit there, you Children, and when you are tired
you may sleep a little. We are going into the forest to cut wood. In
the evening, when we are done, we will come and fetch you away.”

When it was noon, Grethel shared her piece of bread with Haensel,
who had scattered his by the way. Then they fell asleep, and evening
passed, but no one came to the poor children.

They did not awake until it was dark night, and Haensel comforted his
little sister and said, “Just wait, Grethel, until the moon rises, and
then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have strewn. They will
show us our way home again.”

When the moon came, they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the
many thousands of birds, which fly about in the woods and fields, had
picked them all up. Haensel said to Grethel, “We shall soon find the
way,” but they did not find it.

They walked the whole night and all the next day, from morning till
evening, but they did not get out of the forest, and were very hungry,
for they had nothing to eat but two or three berries, which grew on the
ground. And as they were so weary that their legs would carry them no
longer, they lay down beneath a tree and fell asleep.

It was now three mornings since they had left their father’s house.
They began to walk again, but they always got deeper into the forest.
If help did not come soon, they must die of hunger and weariness!

When it was midday, they saw a beautiful Snow-White Bird sitting on a
bough, which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened
to it. And when it had finished its song, it spread its wings and flew
away before them. They followed it until they reached a little house,
on the roof of which it alighted.

When they came quite up to the little House they saw that it was built
of bread and covered with cakes, but that the windows were of clear
sugar.

“We will set to work on that,” said Haensel, “and have a good meal.
I will eat a bit of the roof, and you, Grethel, can eat some of the
window; it will taste sweet.”

Haensel reached up and broke off a little of the roof to try how it
tasted. Grethel leant against the window and nibbled at the panes. Then
a soft voice cried from the room:

    “_Nibble, nibble, gnaw!
      Who nibbles at my door?_”

but the children went on eating without disturbing themselves. Haensel,
who thought the roof tasted very nice, tore down a great piece of it.
Grethel pushed out the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, and
enjoyed herself with it.

Suddenly the door opened, and a very, very old woman, leaning on
crutches, came creeping out. Haensel and Grethel were so terribly
frightened that they let fall what they had in their hands.

The Old Woman, however, nodded her head, and said, “Oh, you dear
Children, who has brought you here? Do come in, and stay with me. No
harm shall happen to you.”

She took them both by the hand, and led them into her little house.
Then she set good food before them, milk and pancakes, with sugar,
apples, and nuts. Afterward she covered two pretty little beds with
clean white linen, and Haensel and Grethel lay down in them, and
thought they were in Heaven.

The Old Woman had only pretended to be so kind. She was really a wicked
Witch, who lay in wait for children, and who had built the little bread
house in order to entice them there. When a child fell into her power,
she killed it, cooked, and ate it; and that was a feast-day with her.

Witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but they have a keen
scent like the beasts’, and are aware when human beings draw near.
When Haensel and Grethel came into her neighborhood, she laughed
maliciously, and said mockingly, “I have them, they shall not escape me
again!”

Early in the morning before the children were awake, she was up. And
when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so pretty, with their
plump red cheeks, she muttered to herself, “That will be a dainty
mouthful!”

Then she seized Haensel with her shrivelled hand, carried him into a
little stable, and shut him in with a grated door. He might scream as
he liked, that was of no use!

Then she went to Grethel, shook her till she awoke, and cried, “Get up,
lazy thing, fetch some water, and cook something good for your brother.
He is in the stable outside, and is to be made fat. When he is fat, I
will eat him.”

Grethel began to weep bitterly. But it was all in vain, she was forced
to do what the wicked Witch ordered her.

And now the best food was cooked for poor Haensel, while Grethel got
nothing but crab-shells. Every morning the woman crept to the little
stable, and cried, “Haensel, stretch out your finger that I may feel if
you will soon be fat.”

When four weeks had gone by she was seized with impatience and would
not wait any longer. “Ho, there! Grethel,” she cried to the girl, “be
active, and bring some water. Let Haensel be fat or lean, to-morrow I
will kill him, and cook him.”

Ah! how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the
water, and how her tears did flow down over her cheeks! “Dear God, do
help us,” she cried. “If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured
us, we should at any rate have died together!”

“Just keep your noise to yourself,” said the Old Woman, “all that won’t
help you at all.”

Early in the morning, Grethel had to go out and hang up the cauldron,
full of water, and light the fire.

“We will bake first,” said the Old Woman, “I have already heated the
oven, and kneaded the dough.” She pushed poor Grethel out to the oven,
from which flames of fire were darting.

“Creep in,” said the Witch, “and see if it is properly heated, so
that we can shut the bread in.” And when once Grethel was inside, she
intended to shut the oven and let her bake in it, and then eat her, too.

But Grethel saw what she had in her mind, and would not creep in.
“Silly Goose,” said the Old Woman; “the door is big enough. Just look,
I can get in myself!” and she crept up and thrust her head in. Then she
fell over into the oven and was miserably burnt to death.

Grethel, however, ran as quick as lightning to Haensel, opened his
little stable, and cried, “Haensel, we are saved! The old Witch is
dead!”

Then Haensel sprang out like a bird from its cage, when the door is
opened for it. How they did rejoice and embrace each other, and dance
about and kiss each other! And as they had no longer any need to fear
her, they went into the Witch’s house, and in every corner there stood
chests full of pearls and jewels.

“These are far better than pebbles!” said Haensel, and thrust into his
pockets whatever could be got in.

And Grethel said, “I, too, will take something home with me,” and
filled her pinafore full.

“But now we will go away,” said Haensel, “that we may get out of the
Witch’s forest.”

When they had walked for two hours, they came to a great piece of
water. “We cannot get over,” said Haensel, “I see no foot-plank, and no
bridge.”

“And no boat crosses either,” answered Grethel, “but a white duck is
swimming there. If I ask her, she will help us over.” Then she cried:

    “_Little Duck, little Duck, dost thou see,
      Haensel and Grethel are waiting for thee?
      There’s never a plank, nor a bridge in sight,
      Take us across on thy back so white._”

The duck came to them, and Haensel seated himself on her back, and
told his sister to sit by him. “No,” replied Grethel, “that will be
too heavy for the little duck. She shall take us across, one after the
other.”

The good little duck did so, and when they were once safely across and
had walked for a short time, the forest seemed to be more and more
familiar to them. At length, they saw from afar their father’s house.
Then they began to run, rushed into the parlor, and threw themselves
into their father’s arms. The man had not known one happy hour since he
had left the children in the forest. The woman, however, was dead.

Grethel emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about
the room, and Haensel threw one handful after another out of his pocket
to add to them. Then all trouble was at an end, and they lived together
in perfect happiness.

My tale is done, there runs a mouse, whosoever catches it, may make
himself a big, big fur cap out of it!




  

THE SEVEN RAVENS


There was once a man who had seven sons, but never a daughter no matter
how much he wished for one.

At length, his wife had a child, and it was a daughter. The joy was
great. But the child was sickly and small, and so weak that it had to
be baptized at once.

The father sent one of the boys in a hurry to the spring, to fetch
water for the baptism. The other six boys ran along with him. And as
each strove to be the first to fill the jug, it fell into the spring.
There they stood, and did not know what to do. None of them dared to go
home.

When they did not come back, the father grew impatient, and said, “They
have forgotten all about it in a game of play, the wicked boys!”

Soon he grew afraid lest the child should die without being baptized,
and he cried out in anger, “I wish the boys were all turned into
Ravens!”

Hardly was the word spoken, before he heard a whirring of wings in
the air above his head. He looked up, and saw seven coal-black Ravens
flying high and away.

The parents could not recall the curse. And though they grieved over
the loss of their seven sons, yet they comforted themselves somewhat
with their dear little daughter, who soon grew strong and every day
more beautiful.

For a long time, she did not know that she had had brothers. Her
parents were careful not to mention them before her. But one day,
she chanced to overhear some people talking about her, and saying,
“that the maiden is certainly beautiful, but really to blame for the
misfortune of her seven brothers.”

Then she was much troubled, and went to her father and mother, and
asked if it was true that she had had brothers, and what was become of
them.

The parents did not dare to keep the secret longer, and said that her
birth was only the innocent cause of what had happened to her brothers.
But the maiden laid it daily to heart, and thought that she must
deliver her brothers.

She had no peace and rest until she set out secretly, and went forth
into the wide world to seek them out, and set them free, let it cost
what it might. She took nothing with her but a little ring belonging
to her parents as a keepsake, a loaf of bread against hunger, a little
pitcher of water against thirst, and a little chair as a provision
against weariness.

And now, she went continually onward, far, far, to the very end of the
world. Then she came to the Sun, but it was too hot and terrible, and
devoured little children. Hastily she ran away, and ran to the Moon,
but it was far too cold, and also awful and malicious. And when it saw
the child, it said:

    “_I smell, I smell
      The flesh of men!_”


On this she ran swiftly away, and came to the Stars, which were kind
and good to her, and each of them sat on its own little chair. But the
Morning Star arose, and gave her the drumstick of a chicken, and said,
“If you have not that drumstick you cannot open the Glass Mountain, and
in the Glass Mountain are your brothers.”

The maiden took the drumstick, wrapped it carefully in a cloth, and
went onward again until she came to the Glass Mountain. The door was
shut, and she thought she would take out the drumstick. But when
she undid the cloth, it was empty, and she had lost the good Star’s
present. What was she now to do? She wished to rescue her brothers, and
had no key to the Glass Mountain. The good little sister took a knife,
cut off one of her little fingers, put it in the door, and succeeded in
opening it.

When she had got inside, a little Dwarf came to meet her, who said, “My
Child, what are you looking for?”

“I am looking for my brothers, the Seven Ravens,” she replied.

The Dwarf said, “The Lord Ravens are not at home, but if you wish to
wait here until they come, step in.”

Thereupon the little Dwarf carried the Ravens’ dinner in, on seven
little plates, and in seven little glasses. The little sister ate a
morsel from each plate, and from each little glass she took a sip. But
in the last little glass she dropped the ring which she had brought
away with her.

Suddenly, she heard a whirring of wings and a rushing through the air,
and then the little Dwarf said, “Now the Lord Ravens are flying home.”

Then they came, and wanted to eat and drink, and looked for their
little plates and glasses. Then said one after the other, “Who has
eaten something from my plate? Who has drunk out of my little glass? It
was a human mouth.”

And when the seventh came to the bottom of the glass, the ring rolled
against his mouth. Then he looked at it, and saw that it was a ring
belonging to his father and mother, and said, “God grant that our
little sister may be here, and then we shall be free.”

When the maiden, who was standing behind the door watching, heard that
wish, she came forth, and on this all the Ravens were restored to their
human form again. And they embraced and kissed each other, and went
joyfully home.




  

ASH-MAIDEN


The wife of a rich man fell sick, and as she felt that her end was
drawing near, she called her only daughter to her bedside and said,
“Dear Child, be good and pious, and then the dear God will always
protect you, and I will look down on you from Heaven and be near you.”
Thereupon she closed her eyes and departed.

Every day, the maiden went out to her mother’s grave and wept, and she
remained pious and good. When winter came the snow spread a white sheet
over the grave, and when the spring-sun had drawn it off again, the man
had taken another wife.

The woman had brought two daughters into the house with her, who were
beautiful and fair of face, but vile and black of heart. Now began a
bad time for the poor child. “Is the stupid goose to sit in the parlor
with us?” said they. “He who wants to eat bread, must earn it. Out with
the kitchen-wench!”

They took her pretty clothes away from her, put an old gray bedgown
on her and gave her wooden shoes. “Just look at the proud Princess,
how decked out she is!” they cried, and laughed, and led her into the
kitchen.

There she had to do hard work from morning till night, get up before
daybreak, carry water, light fires, cook and wash. Besides this, the
sisters did her every imaginable injury--they mocked her and emptied
her peas and lentils into the ashes, so that she was forced to sit and
pick them out again.

In the evening, when she had worked till she was weary, she had no bed
to go to, but had to sleep by the fireside in the ashes. And as on that
account she always looked dusty and dirty, they called her Ash-Maiden.

It happened once that the father was going to the Fair, and he asked
the two daughters what he should bring back for them.

“Beautiful dresses,” said one. “Pearls and jewels,” said the second.

“And you, Ash-Maiden,” said he, “what will you have?”

“Father, break off for me the first branch which knocks against your
hat on your way home.”

So he bought beautiful dresses, pearls and jewels for the two
daughters, and on his way home, as he was riding through a green
thicket, a hazel twig brushed against him and knocked off his hat. Then
he broke off the branch and took it with him.

When he reached home he gave the two daughters the things which
they had wished for, and to Ash-Maiden he gave the branch from the
hazel-bush. Ash-Maiden thanked him, went to her mother’s grave and
planted the branch on it, and wept so much that the tears fell down on
it and watered it.

It grew, however, and became a handsome tree. Thrice a day Ash-Maiden
went and sat beneath it, and wept and prayed, and a little White Bird
always came on the tree. And if Ash-Maiden expressed a wish, the bird
threw down to her what she had wished for.

It happened that the King gave a feast, which was to last three days.
To it all the beautiful young girls in the country were invited,
in order that his son might choose himself a Bride. When the two
sisters heard that they too were to appear among the number, they were
delighted.

They called Ash-Maiden and said, “Comb our hair, brush our shoes, and
fasten our buckles, for we are going to the feast at the King’s palace.”

Ash-Maiden obeyed, but wept, because she too would have liked to go
with them to the dance, and she begged her mother to allow her to do so.

“You go, Ash-Maiden!” said she; “you are dusty and dirty, and would go
to the feast? You have no clothes and shoes, and yet would dance!”

As, however, Ash-Maiden went on asking, the mother at last said, “I
have emptied a dish of lentils into the ashes for you. If you have
picked them out again in two hours, you shall go with us.”

The maiden went through the back-door into the garden, and called, “You
tame Pigeons, you Turtledoves, and all you birds beneath the sky, come
and help me to pick

    “_The good into the pot,
      The bad into the crop!_”

Then two white pigeons came in by the kitchen-window, and afterward
the turtledoves. And at last all the birds beneath the sky came
whirring and crowding in, and alighted amongst the ashes. And the
pigeons nodded with their heads and began _pick, pick, pick, pick,_
and the rest began also _pick, pick, pick, pick,_ and gathered all the
good grains into the dish. Hardly had one hour passed before they had
finished, and all flew out again.

Then the girl took the dish to the mother, and was glad, and believed
that now she would be allowed to go with them to the feast.

But the mother said, “No, Ash-Maiden, you have no clothes and you
cannot dance. You would only be laughed at.”

And as Ash-Maiden wept at this, the mother said, “If you can pick two
dishes of lentils out of the ashes for me in one hour, you shall go
with us.” And she thought to herself, “That she most certainly cannot
do.”

When the mother had emptied the two dishes of lentils amongst the
ashes, the maiden went through the back-door into the garden and cried,
“You tame Pigeons, you Turtledoves, and all you birds under heaven,
come and help me to pick

    “_The good into the pot,
      The bad into the crop!_”

Then two white pigeons came in by the kitchen-window, and afterward the
turtledoves. And at last all the birds beneath the sky came whirring
and crowding in, and alighted amongst the ashes. And the doves nodded
with their heads and began _pick, pick, pick, pick,_ and the others
began also _pick, pick, pick, pick,_ and gathered all the good seeds
into the dishes. And before half an hour was over they had already
finished, and all flew out again.

Then the maiden carried the dishes to the mother and was delighted, and
believed that she might now go with them to the feast.

But the mother said, “All this will not help you. You go not with us,
for you have no clothes and cannot dance. We should be ashamed of you!”

Then she turned her back on Ash-Maiden, and hurried away with her two
proud daughters.

As no one was now at home, Ash-Maiden went to her mother’s grave
beneath the hazel-tree, and cried:

    “_Shiver and quiver, Little Tree,
      Silver and gold throw over me!_”

Then the bird threw a gold and silver dress down to her, and slippers
embroidered with silk and silver. She put on the dress with all speed,
and went to the feast.

Her sisters and the mother, however, did not know her, and thought she
must be a foreign Princess, for she looked so beautiful in the golden
dress. They never once thought of Ash-Maiden, and believed that she was
sitting at home in the dirt, picking lentils out of the ashes.

The Prince went to meet her, took her by the hand, and he danced with
her. He would dance with no other maiden, and never let go of her hand.
And if any one else came to invite her, he said, “This is my partner.”

She danced till it was evening, and then she wanted to go home. But the
King’s Son said, “I will go with you and bear you company,” for he
wished to see to whom the beautiful maiden belonged.

She escaped from him, however, and sprang into the pigeon-house. The
King’s Son waited until her father came, and then he told him that the
stranger maiden had leapt into the pigeon-house. The old man thought,
“Can it be Ash-Maiden?” and they had to bring him an axe and a pickaxe
that he might hew the pigeon-house to pieces, but no one was inside it.

And when they got home, Ash-Maiden lay in her dirty clothes among the
ashes, and a dim little oil-lamp was burning on the mantelpiece. For
Ash-Maiden had jumped quickly down from the back of the pigeon-house,
and had run to the little hazel-tree. There she had taken off her
beautiful clothes and laid them on the grave, and the bird had taken
them away again. Then she had placed herself in the kitchen amongst the
ashes, in her gray gown.

Next day, when the feast began afresh, and her parents and the sisters
had gone once more, Ash-Maiden went to the hazel-tree, and said:

    “_Shiver and quiver, Little Tree,
      Silver and gold throw over me!_”

Then the bird threw down a much more beautiful dress than on the
preceding day. And when Ash-Maiden appeared at the feast in this dress,
every one was astonished at her beauty.

The King’s Son had waited until she came, and instantly took her by the
hand and danced with no one but her. When others came and invited her,
he said, “She is my partner.”

When evening arrived, she wished to leave, and the King’s Son followed
her, and wanted to see into which house she went. But she sprang
away from him, and into the garden behind the house. Therein stood
a beautiful tall tree on which hung the most magnificent pears. She
clambered, like a squirrel, so nimbly between the branches, that the
King’s Son did not know where she was gone.

He waited until her father came, and said to him, “The stranger-maiden
has escaped from me, and I believe she has climbed up the pear-tree.”

The father thought, “Can it be Ash-Maiden?” and had an axe brought and
cut the tree down, but no one was on it.

And when they got into the kitchen, Ash-Maiden lay there amongst the
ashes, as usual, for she had jumped down on the other side of the tree,
had taken the beautiful dress to the bird on the little hazel-tree, and
had put on her gray gown.

On the third day, when the parents and sisters had gone away,
Ash-Maiden went once more to her mother’s grave, and said to the little
tree:

    “_Shiver and quiver, Little Tree,
      Silver and gold throw over me!_”

And now the bird threw down to her a dress which was more splendid and
magnificent than any she had yet had, and the slippers were golden.

And when she went to the feast in the dress, no one knew how to speak
for astonishment. The King’s Son danced with her only, and if any one
invited her to dance, he said, “She is my partner.”

When evening came, Ash-Maiden wished to leave, and the King’s Son was
anxious to go with her; but she escaped from him so quickly that he
could not follow her. The King’s Son, however, had caused the whole
staircase to be smeared with pitch, and there, when she ran down, had
the maiden’s left slipper remained sticking. The King’s Son picked it
up, and it was small and dainty, and all golden.

Next morning, he went with it to the father, and said to him, “No one
shall be my wife, but she whose foot this golden slipper fits.”

Then were the two sisters glad, for they had pretty feet. The eldest
went with the shoe into her room and wanted to try it on, and her
mother stood by. But she could not get her big toe into it, for the
shoe was too small for her.

Then her mother gave her a knife, and said, “Cut the toe off. When you
are Queen you will have no more need to go on foot.”

The maiden cut the toe off, forced the foot into the shoe, swallowed
the pain, and went out to the King’s Son. Then he took her on his horse
as his Bride, and rode away with her. They were, however, obliged to
pass the grave, and there, on the hazel-tree, sat the two pigeons and
cried:

    “_Turn and peep, turn and peep,
      There’s blood within the shoe!
      The shoe it is too small for her,
      The true Bride waits for you!_”

Then he looked at her foot, and saw how the blood was streaming from
it. He turned his horse round and took the false Bride home again, and
said she was not the true one, and that the other sister was to put the
shoe on.

Then this one went into her chamber and got her toes safely into the
shoe, but her heel was too large.

So her mother gave her a knife, and said, “Cut a bit off your heel.
When you are Queen you will have no more need to go on foot.”

The maiden cut a bit off her heel, forced her foot into the shoe,
swallowed the pain, and went out to the King’s Son. He took her on his
horse as his Bride, and rode away with her. But when they passed by the
hazel-tree, two little pigeons sat on it, and cried:

    “_Turn and peep, turn and peep,
      There’s blood within the shoe!
      The shoe it is too small for her,
      The true Bride waits for you!_”

He looked down at her foot, and saw how the blood was running out of
her shoe, and how it had stained her white stocking. Then he turned his
horse and took the false Bride home again. “This also is not the right
one,” said he. “Have you no other daughter?”

“No,” said the man; “there is only a little stunted kitchen-girl which
my late wife left behind her, but she cannot possibly be the Bride.”

The King’s Son said he was to send her up to him; but the mother
answered, “Oh, no, she is much too dirty, she cannot show herself!”

He insisted on it, and Ash-Maiden had to be called. She first washed
her hands and face clean, and then went and bowed down before the
King’s Son, who gave her the golden shoe.

Then she seated herself on a stool, drew her foot out of the heavy
wooden shoe, and put it into the slipper, which fitted like a glove.

And when she rose up and the King’s Son looked at her face he
recognized the beautiful maiden who had danced with him, and cried,
“That is the true Bride!”

The mother and the two sisters were terrified and became pale with
rage. He, however, took Ash-Maiden on his horse and rode away with her.
As they passed by the hazel-tree, the two white doves cried:

    “_Turn and peep, turn and peep,
      No blood is in the shoe!
      The shoe is not too small for her,
      The true Bride rides with you!_”

and when they had cried that, the two came flying down and placed
themselves on Ash-Maiden’s shoulders, one on the right, the other on
the left, and remained sitting there.

When the wedding with the King’s Son had to be celebrated, the two
false sisters came and wanted to get into favor with Ash-Maiden and
share her good fortune. When the betrothed couple went to church,
the elder was at the right side and the younger at the left, and the
pigeons pecked out one eye of each of them. Afterward as they came
back, the elder was at the left, and the younger at the right, and
then the pigeons pecked out the other eye of each. And thus, for their
wickedness and falsehood, they were punished with blindness as long as
they lived.




  

THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER


A shoemaker, by no fault of his own, had become so poor that at last he
had nothing left but leather for one pair of shoes. So in the evening,
he cut out the shoes which he wished to make the next morning. And as
he had a good conscience, he lay down quietly in his bed, commended
himself to God, and fell asleep.

In the morning, after he had said his prayers, and was just going to
sit down to work, lo! both shoes stood all finished on his table. He
was astounded, and did not know what to say. He took the shoes in
his hands to examine them closer, and they were so neatly made that
there was not one bad stitch in them, just as if they were meant for a
masterpiece.

Soon after, a buyer came in, and as the shoes pleased him well, he paid
more for them than was customary. And, with the money, the shoemaker
was able to purchase leather for two pairs of shoes.

He cut them out at night, and next morning was about to set to work
with fresh courage; but he had no need to do so, for, when he got up,
they were already made. And buyers also were not wanting, who gave him
money enough to buy leather for four pairs of shoes.

The following morning, too, he found the four pairs made. And so it
went on constantly, what he cut out in the evening was finished by
morning, so that he soon had his honest living again, and at last
became a wealthy man.

Now it befell that, one evening not long before Christmas, when the man
had been cutting out, he said to his wife, before going to bed, “What
think you, if we were to stay up to-night to see who it is that lends
us this helping hand?”

The woman liked the idea, and lighted a candle, and then they hid
themselves in a corner of the room, behind some clothes which were
hanging there, and watched.

When it was midnight, two pretty tiny naked Little Men came, sat down
by the shoemaker’s table, took all the work which was cut out before
them and began to stitch, sew, and hammer so skilfully and so quickly
with their little fingers, that the shoemaker could not turn away his
eyes for astonishment. They did not stop until all was done, and stood
finished on the table, and then they ran quickly away.

Next morning, the woman said, “The Little Men have made us rich, and we
really must show that we are grateful for it. They run about so much,
and have nothing on, and must be cold. I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I
will make them little shirts, coats, vests, and trousers, and knit
both of them a pair of stockings. Do you make them two little pairs of
shoes.”

The man said, “I shall be very glad to do it.”


And one night, when everything was ready, they laid their presents,
instead of the cut-out work, all together on the table, and then
concealed themselves to see how the Little Men would behave.

At midnight they came bounding in, and wanted to get to work at once.
But as they did not find any leather cut out, only the pretty little
articles of clothing, they were at first astonished, and then they
showed intense delight. They dressed themselves with the greatest
rapidity, putting the pretty clothes on, and singing:

    “_Now we are boys so fine to see,
      Why should we longer cobblers be?_”

Then they danced and skipped and leapt over chairs and benches. At
last, they danced out of doors. From that time forth they came no more,
but as long as the shoemaker lived all went well with him, and all his
undertakings prospered.




  

THE THREE BROTHERS


There was once a man who had three sons, and nothing else in the world
but the house in which he lived. Now each of the sons wished to have
the house after his father’s death; but the father loved them all
alike, and did not know what to do. He did not wish to sell the house,
because it had belonged to his forefathers, else he might have divided
the money amongst them.

At last a plan came into his head, and he said to his sons, “Go into
the world, and try each of you to learn a trade. When you all come
back, he who makes the best masterpiece shall have the house.”

The sons were well content with this, and the eldest determined to be a
blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing-master. They
fixed a time when they should all come home again, and then each went
his way.

It chanced that they all found skilful masters, who taught them their
trades well. The blacksmith had to shoe the King’s horses, and he
thought to himself, “The house is mine, without doubt.” The barber
shaved only great people, and he too already looked upon the house as
his own. The fencing-master got many a blow, but he only bit his lip,
and let nothing vex him; “for,” said he to himself, “if you are afraid
of a blow, you’ll never win the house.”

When the appointed time had gone by, the three brothers came back home
to their father. But they did not know how to find the best opportunity
for showing their skill, so they sat down and consulted together.

As they were sitting thus, all at once a hare came running across the
field. “Ah, ha, just in time!” said the barber. So he took his basin
and soap, and lathered away until the hare came up. Then he soaped and
shaved off the hare’s whiskers whilst he was running at the top of his
speed, and did not even cut his skin or injure a hair on his body.

“Well done!” said the old man, “your brothers will have to exert
themselves wonderfully, or the house will be yours.”

Soon after, up came a nobleman in his coach, dashing along at full
speed. “Now you shall see what I can do, Father,” said the blacksmith.
So away he ran after the coach, took all four shoes off the feet of
one of the horses whilst he was galloping, and put on four new shoes
without stopping him.

“You are a fine fellow, and as clever as your brother,” said his
father. “I do not know to which I ought to give the house.”

Then the third son said, “Father, let me have my turn, if you please.”
And, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword, and flourished
it backward and forward above his head so fast that not a drop fell
upon him. It rained still harder and harder, till at last it came down
in torrents. But he only flourished his sword faster and faster, and
remained as dry as if he were sitting in a house.

When his father saw this he was amazed, and said, “This is the
masterpiece, the house is yours!”

His brothers were satisfied with this, as was agreed before-hand. And,
as they loved one another very much, they all three stayed together in
the house, followed their trades, and, as they had learnt them so well
and were so clever, they earned a great deal of money.

Thus they lived together Happily, until they grew old. And at last,
when one of them fell sick and died, the two others grieved so sorely
about it that they also fell ill, and soon after died. And because they
had been so clever, and had loved one another so much, they were all
laid in the same grave.




  

LITTLE TABLE SET THYSELF, GOLD-ASS, AND CUDGEL OUT OF THE SACK


There was once upon a time, a tailor, who had three sons and only one
goat. But as the goat supported the whole of them with her milk, she
was obliged to have good food, and to be taken every day to pasture.
The sons, therefore, did this, in turn.

Once, the eldest took her to the churchyard, where the finest herbs
were to be found, and let her eat and run about there. At night, when
it was time to go home, he asked, “Goat, have you had enough?”

The goat answered:

    “_I have eaten so much,
      Not a leaf more I’ll touch,
              Ma! Ma!_”

“Come home, then,” said the youth, and took hold of the cord round her
neck, led her into the stable and tied her up securely.

“Well,” said the old tailor, “has the goat had as much food as she
ought?”

“Oh,” answered the son, “she has eaten so much, not a leaf more she’ll
touch.”

But the father wished to satisfy himself, and went down to the stable,
stroked the dear animal and asked, “Goat, are you satisfied?”

The goat answered:

    “_With what should I be satisfied?
      Among the graves I leapt about,
      And found no food, so went without,
            Ma! Ma!_”

“What do I hear?” cried the tailor, and ran up-stairs and said to the
youth, “Hollo, you liar; you said the goat had had enough, and have let
her go hungry!” and in his anger, he took the yard-measure from the
wall, and drove him out with blows.

Next day, it was the turn of the second son, who looked out for a place
in the fence of the garden, where nothing but good herbs grew. And the
goat cleared them all off.

At night, when he wanted to go home, he asked, “Goat, are you
satisfied?”

The goat answered:

    “_I have eaten so much,
      Not a leaf more I’ll touch,
              Ma! Ma!_”

“Come home, then,” said the youth, and led her home and tied her up in
the stable.

“Well,” said the old tailor, “has the goat had as much food as she
ought?”

“Oh,” answered the son, “she has eaten so much, not a leaf more she’ll
touch.”

The tailor would not rely on this, but went down to the stable and
said, “Goat, have you had enough?”

The goat answered:

    “_With what should I be satisfied?
      Among the graves I leapt about,
      And found no food, so went without,
            Ma! Ma!_”

“The godless wretch!” cried the tailor, “to let such a good animal
go hungry,” and he ran up and drove the youth out of doors with the
yard-measure.

Now came the turn of the third son, who wanted to do the thing well,
and sought out some bushes with the finest leaves, and let the goat
devour them.

In the evening when he wanted to go home, he asked, “Goat, have you had
enough?”

The goat answered:

    “_I have eaten so much,
      Not a leaf more I’ll touch,
              Ma! Ma!_”

“Come home, then,” said the youth, and led her into the stable, and
tied her up.

“Well,” said the old tailor, “has the goat had a proper amount of food?”

“She has eaten so much, not a leaf more she’ll touch.”

The tailor did not trust to that, but went down and asked, “Goat, have
you had enough?”

The wicked beast answered:


    “_With what should I be satisfied?
      Among the graves I leapt about,
      And found no leaves, so went without,
            Ma! Ma!_”

“Oh, the brood of liars!” cried the tailor, “each as wicked and
forgetful of his duty as the other! Ye shall no longer make a fool
of me,” and, quite beside himself with anger, he ran up-stairs and
belabored the poor young fellow so vigorously with the yard-measure
that he sprang out of the house.

The old tailor was now alone with his goat. Next morning he went down
into the stable, caressed the goat and said, “Come, my dear little
animal, I myself will take you to feed.”

He took her by the rope and conducted her to green hedges, and amongst
milfoil, and whatever else goats like to eat. “There you may for once
eat to your heart’s content,” said he to her, and let her browse till
evening.

Then he asked, “Goat, are you satisfied?” She replied:

    “_I have eaten so much,
      Not a leaf more I’ll touch,
              Ma! Ma!_”

“Come home, then,” said the tailor, and led her into the stable, and
tied her fast.

When he was going away, he turned round again and said, “Well, are you
satisfied for once?”

But the goat did not behave better to him, and cried:

    “_With what should I be satisfied?
      Among the graves I leapt about,
      And found no leaves, so went without,
            Ma! Ma!_”

When the tailor heard that, he was shocked, and saw clearly that he
had driven away his three sons without cause. “Wait, you ungrateful
creature,” cried he, “it is not enough to drive you forth, I will mark
you so that you will no more dare to show yourself amongst honest
tailors!”

In great haste, he ran up-stairs, fetched his razor, lathered the
goat’s head, and shaved her as clean as the palm of his hand. And as
the yard-measure would have been too good for her, he brought the
horsewhip, and gave her such cuts with it that she ran away with mighty
leaps.

When the tailor was thus left quite alone in his house, he fell into
great grief, and would gladly have had his sons back again. But no one
knew whither they were gone.

The eldest had apprenticed himself to a joiner, and learnt
industriously and unweariedly, and when the time came for him to go on
his travels, his master presented him with a little table which had no
unusual appearance, and was made of common wood. But it had one good
property; if any one put it down, and said:

    “_Little Table!
      Set thyself!_”

the good Little Table was at once covered with a clean little cloth.
And a plate was there, and a knife and fork beside it, and dishes with
boiled meats and roasted meats, as many as there was room for, and a
great glass of red wine shone so that it made the heart glad.

The young journeyman thought, “With this you have enough for your whole
life!” and went joyously about the world, and never troubled himself
whether an inn was good or bad, or if anything was to be found in it
or not. When it suited him he did not enter an inn at all, but either
in the plain, a wood, a meadow, or wherever he fancied, he took his
Little Table off his back, set it down before him, and said:

    “_Little Table!
      Set thyself!_”

and then everything appeared that his heart desired.

At length, he took it into his head to go back to his father, whose
anger would now be appeased, and who would now willingly receive him
with his Wishing-Table. It came to pass that on his way home, he
arrived, one evening, at an inn which was filled with guests. They bade
him welcome, and invited him to sit and eat with them, for otherwise he
would have difficulty in getting anything.

“No,” answered the joiner, “I will not take the few bites out of your
mouths. Rather than that, you shall be my guests.”

They laughed, and thought he was joking. He, however, placed his wooden
Little Table in the middle of the room, and said:

    “_Little Table!
      Set thyself!_”

Instantly it was covered with food, so good that the host could never
have procured it, and the smell of it arose pleasantly to the noses of
the guests.

“Fall to, dear Friends,” said the joiner.

And the guests, when they saw that he meant it, did not need to be
asked twice, but drew near, pulled out their knives and attacked it
valiantly. And what surprised them most, was that when a dish became
empty, a full one instantly took its place. The innkeeper stood in
one corner and watched the doings. He did not know what to say, but
thought, “I could easily find use for such a cook as that in my
kitchen.”

The joiner and his comrades made merry until late into the night. At
length they lay down to sleep, and the young apprentice also went to
bed, and set his Magic Table against the wall.

The host’s thoughts, however, let him have no rest. It occurred to him
that there was a little old table in his lumber-room, which looked
just like the apprentice’s. And he brought it out quite softly, and
exchanged it for the Wishing-Table.

Next morning, the joiner paid for his bed, took up his table, never
thinking that he had got a false one, and went his way.

At midday, he reached his father, who received him with great joy.
“Well, my dear son, what have you learnt?” said he to him.

“Father, I have become a joiner.”

“A good trade,” replied the old man; “but what have you brought back
with you from your apprenticeship?”

“Father, the best thing which I have brought back with me is this
Little Table.”

The tailor examined it on all sides and said, “You did not make a
masterpiece, when you made that. It is a bad old table.”

“But it is a table which furnishes itself,” replied the son. “When I
put it down, and tell it to set itself, the most beautiful dishes stand
on it, and a wine also which gladdens the heart. Just invite all our
relations and friends. They shall refresh and enjoy themselves for
once, for the table will give them all they require.”

When the company was assembled, he put his table in the middle of the
room and said:

    “_Little Table!
      Set thyself!_”

but the little table did not bestir itself, and remained just as bare
as any other table which did not understand language. Then the poor
apprentice became aware that his table had been changed, and was
ashamed at having to stand there like a liar.

The relations, however, mocked him, and were forced to go home without
having eaten or drunk. The father brought out his patches, and began to
tailor again, but the son went to a master in the craft.

The second son had gone to a miller and had apprenticed himself to
him. When his years were over, the master said, “As you have conducted
yourself so well, I give you an Ass of a peculiar kind, which neither
draws a cart nor carries a sack.”

“To what use is he put, then?” asked the young apprentice.

“He lets gold drop from his mouth,” answered the miller. “If you set him
on a cloth, and say:

   “‘_Bricklebrit!_’

the good animal will drop gold pieces for you.”

“That is a fine thing,” said the apprentice, and thanked the master,
and went out into the world. When he had need of gold, he had only to
say:

    “_Bricklebrit!_”

to his Ass, and it rained gold pieces, and he had nothing to do but
pick them off the ground. Wheresoever he went, the best of everything
was good enough for him, and the dearer the better, for he had always a
full purse.

When he had looked about the world for some time, he thought, “You
must seek out your father; if you go to him with the Gold-Ass, he will
forget his anger, and receive you well.”

It came to pass, that he reached the same public-house in which his
brother’s table had been exchanged. He led his Ass by the bridle, and
the host was about to take the animal from him to tie him up, but the
young apprentice said, “Don’t trouble yourself. I will take my gray
horse into the stable, and tie him up myself, for I must know where he
stands.”

This struck the host as odd, and he thought that a man who was forced
to look after his Ass himself, could not have much to spend. But when
the stranger put his hand in his pocket and brought out two gold
pieces, and said he was to provide something good for him, the host
opened his eyes wide, and ran and sought out the best he could muster.

After dinner, the guest asked what he owed. The host did not see why he
should not double the reckoning, and said the apprentice must give two
more gold pieces.

He felt in his pocket, but his gold was just at an end. “Wait an
instant, sir host,” said he, “I will go and fetch some money;” but he
took the tablecloth with him.

The host could not imagine what this could mean, and being curious,
stole after him, and as the guest bolted the stable-door, he peeped
through a hole left by a knot in the wood.

The stranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried:

    “_Bricklebrit!_”

and immediately the beast began to let gold pieces fall, so that it
fairly rained down money on the ground.

“Eh, my word!” said the host, “ducats are quickly coined there! A purse
like that is not amiss.”

The guest paid his score, and went to bed, but in the night the host
stole down into the stable, led away the master of the mint, and tied
up another ass in his place. Early next morning, the apprentice went
away with the ass, and thought that he had his Gold-Ass.

At midday he reached his father, who rejoiced to see him again, and
gladly took him in. “What have you made of yourself, my Son?” asked the
old man.

“A miller, dear Father,” he answered.

“What have you brought back with you from your travels?”

“Nothing else but an ass.”

“There are asses enough here,” said the father. “I would rather have
had a good goat.”

“Yes,” replied the son, “but it is no common ass, but a Gold-Ass. When
I say:

   “‘_Bricklebrit!_’

the good beast opens its mouth and drops a whole sheetful of gold
pieces. Just summon all our relations hither, and I will make them rich
folk.”

“That suits me well,” said the tailor, “for then I shall have no need
to torment myself any longer with the needle;” and he ran out and
called the relations together.

As soon as they were assembled, the miller bade them make way, spread
out his cloth, and brought the ass into the room. “Now watch,” said he,
and cried:

    “_Bricklebrit!_”

but no gold pieces fell, and it was clear that the animal knew nothing
of the art, for every ass does not attain such perfection.

Then the poor miller pulled a long face, saw that he was betrayed, and
begged pardon of the relatives, who went home as poor as they came.
There was no help for it, the old man had to betake him to his needle
once more, and the youth hired himself to a miller.

The third brother had apprenticed himself to a turner, and as that is
skilled labor, he was the longest in learning. His brothers, however,
told him in a letter how badly things had gone with them, and how the
innkeeper had cheated them of their beautiful wishing-gifts on the last
evening before they reached home.

When the turner had served his time, and had to set out on his travels,
as he had conducted himself so well, his master presented him with a
sack, and said, “There is a Cudgel in it.”

“I can put on the sack,” said he, “and it may be of good service to me,
but why should the Cudgel be in it? It only makes it heavy.”

“I will tell you why,” replied the master; “if any one has done
anything to injure you, do but say:

   “‘_Cudgel!
      Out of the sack!_’

and the Cudgel will leap forth among the people, and play such a dance
on their backs, that they will not be able to stir or move for a week,
and it will not leave off until you say:

   “‘_Cudgel!
      Into the sack!_’”

The apprentice thanked him, put the sack on his back, and when any one
came too near him, and wished to attack him, he said:

    “_Cudgel!
      Out of the sack!_”

and instantly the Cudgel sprang out, and dusted the coat or jacket of
one after the other on their backs, and never stopped until it had
stripped it off them. And it was done so quickly, that before any one
was aware, it was already his own turn.

In the evening, the young turner reached the inn where his brothers
had been cheated. He laid his sack on the table before him, and began
to talk of all the wonderful things which he had seen in the world.
“Yes,” said he, “people may easily find a Little Table which will cover
itself, a Gold-Ass, and things of that kind--extremely good things
which I by no means despise--but these are nothing in comparison with
the treasure which I have won for myself, and am carrying about with me
in my sack there.”

The innkeeper pricked up his ears. “What in the world can that be?”
thought he. “The sack must be filled with nothing but jewels. I ought
to get them cheap too, for all good things go in threes.”

When it was time for sleep, the guest stretched himself on the bench,
and laid his sack beneath him for a pillow. When the innkeeper thought
his guest was lying in a sound sleep, he went to him and pushed and
pulled quite gently and carefully at the sack to see if he could
possibly draw it away and lay another in its place. The turner had,
however, been waiting for this for a long time; and now, just as the
innkeeper was about to give a hearty tug, he cried:

    “_Cudgel!
      Out of the sack!_”

Instantly the little Cudgel came forth, and fell on the innkeeper, and
gave him a sound thrashing.

The host cried for mercy. But the louder he cried, so much the more
heavily the Cudgel beat time on his back, until at length he fell to
the ground exhausted.

Then the turner said, “If you do not give back the Little Table that
sets itself, and the Gold-Ass, the dance shall begin afresh.”

“Oh, no,” cried the host, quite humbly, “I will gladly bring out
everything, only make the accursed Kobold creep back into the sack!”

Then said the apprentice, “I will let mercy take the place of justice,
but beware of getting into mischief again!” So he cried:

    “_Cudgel!
      Into the sack!_”

and let him have rest.

Next morning, the turner went home to his father with the
Wishing-Table, and the Gold-Ass. The tailor rejoiced when he saw him
once more, and asked him likewise what he had learned in foreign parts.

“Dear Father,” said he, “I have become a turner.”

“A skilled trade,” said the father. “What have you brought back with
you from your travels?”

“A precious thing, dear Father,” replied the son, “a Cudgel in the
sack.”

“What!” cried the father, “a Cudgel! That’s worth your trouble, indeed!
From every tree you can cut one for yourself.”

“But not one like this, dear Father. If I say:

   “‘_Cudgel!
      Out of the sack!_’

the Cudgel springs out and leads any one, who means ill by me, a weary
dance, and never stops until he lies on the ground and prays for fair
weather. Look you, with this Cudgel have I got back the Wishing-Table
and the Gold-Ass, which the thievish innkeeper took away from my
brothers. Now let them both be sent for, and invite all our kinsmen. I
will give them to eat and to drink, and will fill their pockets with
gold into the bargain.”

The old tailor would not quite believe, but nevertheless got the
relatives together. Then the turner spread a cloth in the room, and led
in the Gold-Ass, and said to his brother, “Now, dear Brother, speak to
him.”

The miller said:

    “_Bricklebrit!_”

and instantly the gold pieces fell down on the cloth like a
thunder-shower, and the Ass did not stop until every one of them had so
much that he could carry no more. (I can see in your face that you also
would have liked to be there!)

Then the turner brought the Little Table, and said, “Now, dear Brother,
speak to it.” And scarcely had the carpenter said:

    “_Little Table!
      Set thyself!_”

than it was spread, and covered with the most exquisite dishes. Then
such a meal took place as the good tailor had never yet known in his
house. The whole party of kinsmen stayed together till far in the
night, and were all merry and glad. The tailor locked away needle and
thread, yard-measure and goose, in a press, and lived with his three
sons in joy and splendor.

What, however, has become of the goat, who was to blame for the tailor
driving out his three sons? That I will tell you.

She was ashamed that she had a bald head, and ran to a fox’s hole and
crept into it. When the fox came home, he was met by two great eyes
shining out of the darkness, and was terrified and ran away. A bear
met him, and as the fox looked quite disturbed, he said, “What is the
matter with you, brother Fox, why do you look like that?”

“Ah,” answered Redskin, “a fierce beast is in my cave and stared at me
with its fiery eyes.”

“We will soon drive him out,” said the bear, and went with him to the
cave and looked in. But when he saw the fiery eyes, fear seized him
likewise. He would have nothing to do with the furious beast, and took
to his heels.

The bee met him, and as she saw that he was ill at ease, she said,
“Bear, you are really pulling a very pitiful face. What has become of
all your jollity?”

“It is all very well for you to talk,” replied the bear, “a furious
beast with staring eyes is in Redskin’s house, and we can’t drive him
out.”

The bee said, “Bear, I pity you! I am a poor weak creature, whom you
would not turn aside to look at. Yet I believe I can help you.” She
flew into the fox’s cave, lighted on the goat’s clean, shaved head, and
stung her so hard that she sprang up crying, “_Ma! ma!_” and ran forth
into the world like mad; and to this hour no one knows where she has
gone.




  

IRON JOHN


Once on a time there was a King who had a great forest near his palace,
full of all kinds of wild animals. One day he sent out a huntsman to
shoot him a roe, but he did not come back.

“Perhaps some accident has befallen him,” said the King, and the next
day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him, but they
too stayed away.

Then on the third day, he sent for all his huntsmen, and said, “Scour
the whole forest through, and do not give up until ye have found all
three.” But of these also, none came home again, and of the pack of
hounds which they had taken with them, none were seen more.

From that time forth, no one would any longer venture into the forest,
and it lay in deep stillness and solitude. Nothing was seen but
sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it. This lasted for many
years, when a strange huntsman came to the King asking for work, and
offered to go into the dangerous forest. The King, however, would not
give his consent, and said, “It is not safe in there. I fear it would
fare with you no better than with the others, and you would never come
out again.”

The huntsman replied, “Lord, I will venture it at my own risk; of fear
I know nothing.”

The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest. It
was not long before the dog fell in with some game, and wanted to
pursue it. But hardly had the dog run two steps when he stood before a
deep pool and could go no farther. Then a naked arm stretched itself
out of the water, seized him, and drew him under.

When the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetched three men to come
with buckets and bale out the water. When they could see the bottom,
there lay a Wild Man whose body was brown like rusty iron, and whose
hair hung over his face down to his knees. They bound him with cords,
and led him away to the castle.

There was great astonishment over the Wild Man. The King had him put
in an iron cage in his courtyard, and forbade the door to be opened
on pain of death, and the Queen herself was to take the key into her
keeping. And from this time forth, every one could once more go into
the forest with safety.

The King had a son, eight years old, who one day was playing in the
courtyard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell into the
cage. The boy ran thither and said, “Give me my ball.”

“Not till you have opened the door for me,” answered the man.

“No,” said the boy, “I will not do that. The King has forbidden it,”
and ran away.

The next day he again went and asked for his ball. The Wild Man said,
“Open my door,” but the boy would not.

On the third day when the King had ridden out hunting, the boy went
once more and said, “I cannot open the door even if I wished, for I
have not the key.”

Then the Wild Man said, “It lies under your mother’s pillow. You can
get it there.”

The boy, who wanted to have his ball back, cast all thought to the
winds, and brought the key. The door opened with difficulty, and the
boy pinched his fingers. When it was open, the Wild Man stepped out,
gave him the golden ball, and hurried away.

But the boy was afraid. He called and cried after him, “Oh, Wild Man,
do not go away, or I shall be beaten!”

The Wild Man turned back, took him up, set him on his shoulder, and
went with hasty steps into the forest.

When the King came home, he saw the empty cage, and asked the Queen how
that had happened. She knew nothing about it, and sought the key, but
it was gone. She called the boy, but no one answered. The King sent out
people to seek for him in the fields, but they did not find him. Then
he could easily guess what had happened, and much grief reigned in the
Royal Court.

When the Wild Man had reached once more the dark forest, he took the
boy down from his shoulder, and said to him, “You will never see your
father and mother again, but I will keep you with me for you have set
me free, and I pity you. If you do all I bid you, you shall fare well.
Of treasure and gold have I enough, and more than any one in the world.”

He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept. And the next
morning, the man took him to a well, and said, “Behold, the gold well
is as bright and clear as crystal; you shall sit beside it, and take
care that nothing falls into it, or it will be polluted. I will come
every evening to see if you have obeyed my order.”

The boy placed himself by the margin of the well, and often saw a
golden fish or a golden snake show itself therein, and he took care
that nothing fell in. As he was sitting thus, his finger hurt him so
violently that without thinking he put it in the water. He drew it
quickly out again, but saw that it was quite gilded. And whatsoever
pains he took to wash the gold off again, all was to no purpose.

In the evening, Iron John came back, looked at the boy, and said, “What
has happened to the well?”

“Nothing, nothing,” he answered, and held his finger behind his back,
that the man might not see it.

But he said, “You have dipped your finger into the water. This time it
may pass, but take care you do not again let anything get in.”

At daybreak the boy was already sitting by the well and watching it.
His finger hurt him again, and he passed it over his head, and then
unhappily a hair fell down into the well. He took it quickly out, but
it was quite gilded.

Iron John came, and already knew what had happened. “You have let a
hair fall into the well,” said he. “I will allow you to watch by it
once more, but if this happens the third time, then the well will be
polluted, and you can no longer remain with me.”

On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir his finger,
however much it hurt him. But the time was long to him, and he looked
at the reflection of his face on the surface of the water. And as he
still bent down more and more trying to look straight into the eyes,
his long hair fell down from his shoulders into the water. He raised
himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of his head was golden,
and shone like the sun.

You may imagine how terrified the poor boy was! He took his
pocket-handkerchief and tied it round his head, in order that the man
might not see it.

When he came, he already knew everything, and said, “Take off the
handkerchief.” Then the golden hair streamed forth, and let the boy
excuse himself as he might, it was of no use. “You have not stood the
trial, and can no longer stay here. Go forth into the world. There you
will learn what poverty is. But as you have not a bad heart, and as I
mean well by you, there is one thing I will grant you. If you fall into
any difficulty, come to the forest and cry, ‘Iron John,’ and then I
will come and help you. My power is great, greater than you think, and
I have gold and silver in abundance.”

Then the King’s Son left the forest, and walked by beaten and unbeaten
paths ever onward, until at length he reached a great city. There he
looked for work, but could find none, and he had learnt nothing by
which he could help himself.

At length, he went to the palace, and asked if they would take him in.
The people about Court did not know what use to make of him, but they
liked him, and told him to stay. At last, the cook took him into his
service, and said he might carry wood and water, and rake the cinders
together.

Once when it happened that no one else was at hand, the cook ordered
him to carry the food to the royal table, but as he did not like to
let his golden hair be seen, he kept his little hat on. Such a thing
as that had never come under the King’s notice, and he said, “When you
serve at the royal table you must take off your hat.”

He answered, “Ah, Lord, I cannot.”

Then the King had the cook called before him. He scolded him, and asked
how he could take such a boy as that into his service; and said that he
was to turn him off at once. The cook, however, had pity on him, and
exchanged him for the gardener’s boy.

And now, the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig, and
bear the wind and bad weather.

One day in summer when he was working alone in the garden, the day was
so warm he took his little hat off that the air might cool him. As the
sun shone on his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell
into the bedroom of the King’s Daughter. Up she sprang to see what it
could be. Then she saw the boy, and cried to him, “Boy, bring me a
wreath of flowers.”


He put his hat on with all haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and
bound them together. When he was ascending the stairs with them, the
gardener met him, and said, “How can you take the King’s Daughter a
garland of such common flowers? Go quickly, and get another, and
seek out the prettiest and rarest.”

“Oh, no,” replied the boy, “the wild ones have more scent, and will
please her better.”

When he went into the room, the King’s Daughter said, “Take your cap
off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.”

He again said, “I cannot.”

She, however, caught at his hat and pulled it off, and then his golden
hair rolled down on his shoulders. And it was splendid to behold.

He wanted to run out, but she held him by the arm, and gave him a
handful of ducats. With these he departed, but he cared nothing for the
gold pieces. He took them to the gardener, and said, “I give them to
your children, they may play with them.”

The following day, the King’s Daughter again called to him that he was
to bring her a wreath of field-flowers. When he went in with it, she
snatched at his hat, and wanted to take it away from him, but he held
it fast with both hands. She again gave him a handful of ducats. But he
would not keep them, and presented them to the gardener as playthings
for his children.

On the third day, things went just the same. She could not get his hat
away from him, and he would not have her money.

Not long afterward, the country was overrun by war. The King gathered
together his people, and did not know whether or not he could overcome
the enemy, who was superior in strength and had a mighty army.

Then said the gardener’s boy, “I am grown up, and will go to the wars
also, only give me a horse.”

The others laughed, and said, “Seek one for yourself when we are gone.
We will leave one behind us in the stable for you.”

When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and got the horse.
It was lame of one foot, and limped _hobblety jig, hobblety jig_.
Nevertheless he mounted it, and rode away to the dark forest. When he
came to the outskirts, he called “Iron John” three times so loudly that
it echoed through the trees.

Thereupon the Wild Man appeared immediately, and said, “What do you
desire?”

“I want a strong steed, for I am going to the wars.”

“That you shall have, and still more than you ask.” Then the Wild Man
went back into the forest, and it was not long before a stable-boy
came out of it, who led a horse that snorted, and could hardly be
restrained. Behind them followed a great troop of soldiers entirely
equipped in iron, and their swords flashed in the sun. The youth made
over his three-legged horse to the stable-boy, mounted the other, and
rode at the head of the soldiers.

When he drew near the battle-field, a great part of the King’s men
had already fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give way.
Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, broke like a
hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposed him. They began
to fly, but the youth pursued, and never stopped, until there was not a
single man left.

Instead, however, of returning to the King, he conducted his troop by
side-roads to the forest, and called Iron John.

“What do you desire?” asked the Wild Man.

“Take back your horse and troops, and give me my three-legged horse
again.” All that he asked was done, and soon he was riding on his
three-legged horse.

When the King returned to his palace, his daughter went to meet him,
and wished him joy of his victory. “I am not the one who carried away
the victory,” said he, “but a stranger Knight who came to my assistance
with his soldiers.” The daughter wanted to hear who the strange Knight
was, but the King did not know, and said, “He followed the enemy, and I
did not see him again.”

She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but he smiled, and
said, “He has just come home on his three-legged horse, and the others
have been mocking him, and crying, ‘Here comes our hobblety jig back
again!’ They asked, too, ‘Under what hedge have you been lying sleeping
all the time?’ He, however, answered, ‘I did the best of all, and it
would have gone badly without me.’ And then he was ridiculed still
more.”

The King said to his daughter, “I will proclaim a great feast that
shall last for three days, and you shall throw a Golden Apple. Perhaps
the unknown will come to it.”

When the feast was announced, the youth went out to the forest, and
called Iron John.

“What do you desire?” asked he.

“That I may catch the King’s Daughter’s Golden Apple.”

“It is as safe as if you had it already,” said Iron John. “You shall
likewise have a suit of red armor for the occasion, and ride on a
spirited chestnut horse.”

When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took his place
amongst the Knights, and was recognized by no one. The King’s Daughter
came forward, and threw a Golden Apple to the Knights. None of them
caught it but he; only as soon as he had it, he galloped away.

On the second day, Iron John equipped him as a white Knight, and gave
him a white horse. Again he was the only one who caught the apple, and
he did not linger an instant, but galloped off with it.

The King grew angry, and said, “That is not allowed. He must appear
before me and tell his name.” He gave the order that if the Knight who
caught the apple should go away again, they should pursue him, and, if
he would not come back willingly, they should cut him down and stab him.

On the third day, he received from Iron John a suit of black armor and
a black horse. Again he caught the apple. But when he was riding off
with it, the King’s attendants pursued him, and one of them got so near
that he wounded the youth’s leg with the point of his sword. The youth
nevertheless escaped from them, but his horse leapt so violently that
the helmet fell from his head, and they could see that he had golden
hair. They rode back and announced this to the King.

The following day, the King’s Daughter asked the gardener about his
boy. “He is at work in the garden. The queer creature has been at the
festival too, and only came home yesterday evening. He has likewise
shown my children three Golden Apples which he has won.”

The King had him summoned into his presence. He came and again had his
hat on his head. But the King’s Daughter went up to him and took it
off. Then his golden hair fell down over his shoulders, and he was so
handsome that all were amazed.

“Are you the Knight who came every day to the festival, always in
different colors, and who caught the three Golden Apples?” asked the
King.

“Yes,” answered he, “and here are the apples,” and he took them out
of his pocket, and returned them to the King. “If you desire further
proof, you may see the wound which your people gave me when they
followed me. But I am likewise the Knight who helped you win your
victory over your enemies.”

“If you can perform such deeds as that, you are no gardener’s boy. Tell
me, who is your father?”

“My father is a mighty King, and gold have I in plenty as much as I
require.”

“I well see,” said the King, “that I owe thanks to you. Can I do
anything to please you?”

“Yes,” answered he, “that indeed you can. Give me your daughter to
wife.”

The maiden laughed, and said, “He does not stand much on ceremony, but
I have already seen by his golden hair that he is no gardener’s boy,”
and then she went and kissed him.

His father and mother came to the wedding, and were in great delight,
for they had given up all hope of ever seeing their dear son again. And
as they were sitting at the marriage-feast, the music suddenly stopped,
the doors opened, and a stately King came in with a great retinue.

He went up to the youth, embraced him and said, “I am Iron John, and
was by enchantment a Wild Man, but you have set me free. All the
treasures which I possess, shall be yours.”




  

CLEVER ELSIE


There was once a man who had a daughter who was called Clever Elsie.
And when she had grown up her father said, “We will get her married.”

“Yes,” said the mother, “if only any one would come who would have her.”

At length a man came from a distance, and wooed her, who was called
Hans. But he made one condition, that Clever Elsie should be really
wise.

“Oh,” said the father, “she’s sharp enough.”

And the mother said, “Oh, she can see the wind coming up the street,
and hear the flies coughing.”

“Well,” said Hans, “if she is not really wise, I won’t have her.”

When they were sitting at dinner, and had eaten, the mother said,
“Elsie, go into the cellar and fetch some beer.”

Then Clever Elsie took the pitcher from the wall, went into the cellar,
and tapped the lid briskly as she went that the time might not appear
long. When she was below she fetched herself a chair, and set it before
the barrel, so that she had no need to stoop, and did not hurt her
back or do herself any unexpected injury.

Then she placed the can before her, and turned the tap, and while the
beer was running, she would not let her eyes be idle, but looked up at
the wall. And after much peering here and there, saw a pickaxe exactly
above her, which the masons had left there by mistake.

Then Clever Elsie began to weep and said, “If I get Hans, and we have a
child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellar here to draw
beer, then the pickaxe will fall on his head and kill him.” Then she
sat and wept and screamed with all the strength of her body, over the
misfortune which lay before her.

Those upstairs waited for the drink, but Clever Elsie still did not
come. Then the woman said to the servant, “Just go down into the cellar
and see where Elsie is.”

The maid went and found her sitting in front of the barrel, screaming
loudly.

“Elsie, why do you weep?” asked the maid.

“Ah,” she answered, “have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans, and we
have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pickaxe
may fall on his head, and kill him.”

Then said the maid, “What a clever Elsie we have!” and sat down beside
her and began loudly to weep over the misfortune.

After a while, as the maid did not come back, and those upstairs were
thirsty for the beer, the man said to the boy, “Just go down into the
cellar and see where Elsie and the girl are.”

The boy went down, and there sat Clever Elsie and the girl both
weeping together. Then he asked, “Why are you weeping?”

“Ah,” said Elsie, “have I not reason to weep? If I get Hans, and we
have a child, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pickaxe
will fall on his head and kill him.”

Then said the boy, “What a clever Elsie we have!” and sat down by her,
and likewise began to howl loudly.

Upstairs they waited for the boy, but as he did not return, the man
said to the woman, “Just go down into the cellar and see where Elsie
is!”

The woman went down, and found all three in the midst of their
lamentations, and inquired what was the cause. Then Elsie told her
also, that her future child was to be killed by the pickaxe, when it
grew big and had to draw beer, and the pickaxe fell down.

Then said the mother likewise, “What a clever Elsie we have!” and sat
down and wept with them.

The man upstairs waited a short time, but as his wife did not come back
and his thirst grew ever greater, he said, “I must go into the cellar
myself and see where Elsie is.”

But when he got into the cellar, and they were all sitting together
crying, and he heard the reason, and that Elsie’s child was the cause,
and that Elsie might perhaps bring one into the world some day, and
that it might be killed by the pickaxe, if it should happen to be
sitting beneath it, drawing beer just at the very time when it fell, he
cried, “Oh, what a clever Elsie!” and sat down, and likewise wept with
them.

The Bridegroom stayed up-stairs alone for a long time; then as no one
came back he thought, “They must be waiting for me below. I, too, must
go there and see what they are about.”

When he got down, all five of them were sitting screaming and lamenting
quite piteously, each outdoing the other.

“What misfortune has happened then?” asked he.

“Ah, dear Hans,” said Elsie, “if we marry each other and have a child,
and he is big, and we perhaps send him here to draw something to drink,
then the pickaxe which has been left up there might dash his brains
out, if it were to fall down, so have we not reason to weep?”

“Come,” said Hans, “more understanding than that is not needed for my
household, as you are such a clever Elsie, I will have you,” and he
seized her hand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.

After Hans had had her some time, he said, “Wife, I am going out to
work and earn money for us. Go into the field and cut the corn, that we
may have some bread.”

“Yes, dear Hans, I will do that.”

After Hans had gone away, she cooked herself some good broth, and took
it into the field with her. When she came to the field she said to
herself, “What shall I do? Shall I shear first, or shall I eat first?
Oh, I will eat first.”

Then she emptied her basin of broth, and when she was fully satisfied,
she once more said, “What shall I do? Shall I shear first, or shall I
sleep first? I will sleep first.” Then she lay down among the corn and
fell asleep.

Hans had been at home for a long time, but Elsie did not come. Then
said he, “What a clever Elsie I have. She is so industrious, that she
does not even come home to eat.”

As, however, she still stayed away, and it was evening, Hans went out
to see what she had cut. But nothing was cut, and she was lying among
the corn, asleep. Then Hans hastened home and brought a fowler’s net
with little bells and hung it round about her, and she still went on
sleeping. Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and sat down in his
chair and worked.

At length, when it was quite dark, Clever Elsie awoke and when she got
up there was a jingling all round about her, and the bells rang at each
step which she took. Then she was frightened, and became uncertain
whether she really was Clever Elsie or not, and said, “Is it I, or is
it not I?”

But she knew not what answer to make to this, and stood for a time in
doubt. At length she thought, “I will go home and ask if it be I, or if
it be not I. They will be sure to know.”

She ran to the door of her own house, but it was shut. Then she knocked
at the window and cried, “Hans, is Elsie within?”

“Yes,” answered Hans, “she is within.”

Hereupon she was terrified, and said, “Ah, heavens! Then it is not I,”
and went to another door.

But when the people heard the jingling of the bells, they would not
open it, and she could get in nowhere. Then she ran out of the village,
and no one has seen her since.




  

THE BREMEN TOWN-MUSICIANS


A certain man had a Donkey, which had carried the corn-sacks to the
mill faithfully for many a long year; but his strength was going, and
he was growing more and more unfit for work.

Then his master began to consider how he might best save his keep; but
the Donkey, seeing that no good wind was blowing, ran away and set out
on the road to Bremen.

“There,” he thought, “I can surely be town-musician.”

When he had walked some distance, he found a Hound lying on the road,
gasping like one who had run till he was tired.

“What are you gasping so for, you big fellow?” asked the Donkey.

“Ah,” replied the Hound, “as I am old, and daily grow weaker and no
longer can hunt, my master wants to kill me. So I have taken to flight.
But now how am I to earn my bread?”

“I tell you what,” said the Donkey, “I am going to Bremen, and shall
be town-musician there. Come with me and engage yourself also as a
musician. I will play the lute, and you shall beat the kettledrum.”

The Hound agreed, and on they went.

Before long, they came to a Cat, sitting on the path, with a face like
three rainy days!

“Now then, old shaver, what has gone askew with you?” asked the Donkey.

“Who can be merry when his neck is in danger?” answered the Cat.
“Because I am now getting old, and my teeth are worn to stumps, and I
prefer to sit by the fire and spin, rather than hunt about after mice,
my mistress wants to drown me, so I have run away. But now good advice
is scarce. Where am I to go?”

“Come with us to Bremen. You understand night-music, so you can be a
town-musician.”

The Cat thought well of it, and went with them.

After this the three fugitives came to a farmyard, where the Cock was
sitting upon the gate, crowing with all his might.

“Your crow goes through and through one,” said the Donkey. “What is the
matter?”

“I have been foretelling fine weather, because it is the day on
which Our Lady washes the Christ-child’s little shirts, and wants to
dry them,” said the Cock. “But guests are coming for Sunday, so the
housewife has no pity, and has told the cook that she intends to eat me
in the soup to-morrow. This evening I am to have my head cut off. Now I
am crowing at full pitch while I can.”

“Ah, but Red-Comb,” said the Donkey, “you had better come away with
us. We are going to Bremen. You can find something better than death
everywhere. You have a good voice, and if we make music together, it
must have some quality!”

The Cock agreed to this plan, and all four went on together.

They could not, however, reach the city of Bremen in one day, and in
the evening they came to a forest where they meant to pass the night.
The Donkey and the Hound laid themselves down under a large tree. The
Cat and the Cock settled themselves in the branches; but the Cock flew
right to the top, where he was most safe.

Before he went to sleep, he looked round on all the four sides, and
thought he saw in the distance a little spark burning. So he called out
to his companions that there must be a house not far off, for he saw a
light.

The Donkey said, “If so, we had better get up and go on, for the
shelter here is bad.”

The Hound thought that a few bones with some meat would do him good too!

They made their way to the place where the light was, and soon saw
it shine brighter and grow larger, until they came to a well-lighted
robber’s house. The Donkey, as the biggest, went to the window and
looked in.

“What do you see, my Grey-Horse?” asked the Cock.

“What do I see?” answered the Donkey; “a table covered with good things
to eat and drink, and robbers sitting at it enjoying themselves.”

“That would be the sort of thing for us,” said the Cock.

“Yes, yes! ah, how I wish we were there!” said the Donkey.

Then the animals took counsel together as to how they could drive away
the robbers, and at last they thought of a plan. The Donkey was to
place himself with his forefeet upon the window-ledge, the Hound was
to jump on the Donkey’s back, the Cat was to climb upon the Hound, and
lastly the Cock was to fly up and perch upon the head of the Cat.

When this was done, at a given signal, they began to perform their
music together. The Donkey brayed, the Hound barked, the Cat mewed, and
the Cock crowed. Then they burst through the window into the room, so
that the glass clattered!

At this horrible din, the robbers sprang up, thinking no otherwise
than that a ghost had come in, and fled in a great fright out into the
forest.

The four companions now sat down at the table, well content with what
was left, and ate as if they were going to fast for a month.

As soon as the four minstrels had done, they put out the light, and
each sought for himself a sleeping-place according to his nature and
to what suited him. The Donkey laid himself down upon some straw in
the yard, the Hound behind the door, the Cat upon the hearth near the
warm ashes, and the Cock perched himself upon a beam of the roof. Being
tired with their long walk, they soon went to sleep.

When it was past midnight, the robbers saw from afar that the light was
no longer burning in their house, and all appeared quiet.

The captain said, “We ought not to have let ourselves be frightened out
of our wits;” and ordered one of them to go and examine the house.

The messenger finding all still, went into the kitchen to light a
candle, and, taking the glistening fiery eyes of the Cat for live
coals, he held a lucifer-match to them to light it. But the Cat did not
understand the joke, and flew in his face, spitting and scratching.

He was dreadfully frightened, and ran to the back door, but the Dog,
who lay there, sprang up and bit his leg.

Then, as he ran across the yard by the straw-heap, the Donkey gave him
a smart kick with his hind foot. The Cock, too, who had been awakened
by the noise, and had become lively, cried down from the beam:

    “_Kicker-ee-ricker-ee-ree!_”

Then the robber ran back as fast as he could to his captain, and said,
“Ah, there is a horrible Witch sitting in the house, who spat on me
and scratched my face with her long claws. By the door stands a man
with a knife, who stabbed me in the leg. In the yard there lies a black
monster, who beat me with a wooden club. And above, upon the roof, sits
the judge, who called out:

   “‘_Bring the rogue here to me!_’

so I got away as well as I could.”

After this the robbers did not trust themselves in the house again. But
it suited the four musicians of Bremen so well that they did not care
to leave it any more.

And the mouth of him who last told this story, is still warm.




  

THE SIX SWANS


Once upon a time, a certain King was hunting in a great forest, and he
chased a wild beast so eagerly that none of his attendants could follow
him. When evening drew near, he stopped and looked around him, and saw
that he had lost his way. He sought a way out, but could find none.
Then he perceived an Old Woman with a head which nodded all the time,
who came toward him, but she was a Witch.

“Good woman,” said he to her, “can you not show me the way through the
forest?”

“Oh, yes, Lord King,” she answered, “that I certainly can, but on one
condition, and if you do not fulfill that, you will never get out of
the forest, and will die of hunger in it.”

“What kind of a condition is it?” asked the King.

“I have a daughter,” said the old woman, “who is as beautiful as any
one in the world, and well deserves to be your wife. If you will make
her your Queen, I will show you the way out of the forest.”

In the anguish of his heart the King consented, and the old woman led
him to her little hut, where her daughter was sitting by the fire. She
received the King as if she had been expecting him. He saw that she was
very beautiful, but still she did not please him, and he could not look
at her without secret horror.

After he had taken the maiden up on his horse, the old woman showed him
the way, and the King reached his royal palace again, where the wedding
was celebrated.

The King had already been married once, and had by his first wife,
seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he loved better than anything
else in the world. As he now feared that the new Queen might not treat
them well, and even do them some injury, he took them to a lonely
castle which stood in the midst of a forest. It lay concealed, and the
way was so difficult to find, that he himself would not have found it
at all, if a Wise Woman had not given him a ball of yarn with wonderful
properties. When he threw it down before him, it unrolled itself and
showed him his path.

The King, however, went so frequently to visit his dear children, that
the Queen noticed his absence. She was curious and wanted to know what
he did when he was alone in the forest. She gave a great deal of money
to his servants, and they betrayed the secret to her, and told her
likewise of the ball which alone could point out the way.

And now she knew no rest until she had learnt where the King kept the
ball of yarn. Then she made little shirts of white silk, and as she had
learnt the art of witchcraft from her mother, she sewed a charm inside
them. And one day, when the King had ridden forth to hunt, she took the
little shirts and went into the forest, and the ball showed her the
way.

The children, who saw from a distance that some one was approaching,
thought that their dear father was coming to them, and full of joy,
ran to meet him. Then she threw one of the little shirts over each of
them. And no sooner had the shirts touched their bodies than they were
changed into Swans, and flew away over the forest.

The Queen went home quite delighted, and thought she had got rid of all
the children, but the girl had not run out with her brothers, and the
Queen knew nothing about her.

Next day, the King went to visit his children, but found no one but the
little girl.

“Where are your brothers?” asked the King.

“Alas, dear Father,” she answered, “they have gone away and left me
alone!” and she told him that she had seen from her little window, how
her brothers had flown away over the forest in the shape of Swans. And
she showed him the feathers, which they had let fall in the courtyard,
and which she had picked up.

The King mourned, but he did not think that the Queen had done this
wicked deed. And as he feared that the girl also would be stolen from
him, he wanted to take her away. But she was afraid of the Queen,
and entreated the King to let her stay just one night more in the
forest-castle.

The poor girl thought, “I can no longer remain here. I will go and seek
my brothers.” And when night came, she ran away, and went straight into
the forest.

She walked the whole night long, and next day also without stopping,
until she could go no farther for weariness. Then she saw a forest-hut,
and went into it, and found a room with six little beds. She did not
venture to get into any of them, but crept under one, and lay down
on the hard ground, to pass the night there. Just before sunset she
heard a rustling, and saw six Swans come flying in at the window.
They alighted on the ground and blew at each other, and blew all the
feathers off, and their swan’s skins stripped off like a shirt.

Then the maiden looked at them and recognized her brothers. She
rejoiced and crept forth from beneath the bed. The brothers were not
less delighted to see their little sister, but their joy was short.

“Here can you not abide,” they said to her. “This is a shelter for
robbers. If they come home and find you, they will kill you.”

“But can you not protect me?” asked the little sister.

“No,” they replied, “only for one quarter of an hour each evening, can
we lay aside our swan’s skins and have our human form. After that, we
are once more turned into Swans.”

The little sister wept, and said, “Can you not be set free?”

“Alas, no,” they answered, “the conditions are too hard! For six years
you may neither speak nor laugh, and in that time you must sew together
six little shirts of Star-Flowers for us. And if one single word falls
from your lips, all your work will be lost.”

And when the brothers had said this, the quarter of an hour was over,
and they flew out of the window again as Swans.

The maiden, however, resolved to deliver her brothers, even if it
should cost her her life. She left the hut, went into the midst of the
forest, seated herself on a tree, and there passed the night. Next
morning, she went out and gathered Star-Flowers and began to sew.
She could not speak to any one, and she had no wish to laugh. She sat
there and looked at nothing but her work.

When she had spent a long time there, it came to pass that the King of
the country was hunting in the forest, and his huntsmen came to the
tree on which the maiden was sitting.

They called to her, and said, “Who are you?” But she made no answer.
“Come down to us,” said they. “We will not do you any harm.”

She only shook her head. As they pressed her further with questions,
she threw her golden necklace down to them, and thought to content them
with that. They, however, did not cease, and then she threw her girdle
down to them, and as this also was to no use, her garters, and little
by little everything which she had on that she could do without, until
she had nothing left but her shift. The huntsmen, however, did not let
themselves be turned aside by that, but climbed the tree and fetched
the maiden down and led her before the King.

The King asked, “Who are you? What are you doing on the tree?”

But she did not answer. He put the question in every language that he
knew, but she remained as mute as a fish. As she was so beautiful, the
King’s heart was touched, and he was smitten with a great love for her.
He put his mantle on her, took her before him on his horse, and carried
her to his castle.

Then he caused her to be dressed in rich garments, and she shone in her
beauty like bright daylight, but no word could be drawn from her. He
placed her by his side at table, and her modest bearing and courtesy
pleased him so much, that he said, “She is the one whom I wish to
marry, and no other woman in the world.” And a few days after, he
united himself to her.

The King, however, had a wicked mother, who was dissatisfied with his
marriage and spoke ill of the young Queen. “Who knows,” said she, “from
whence comes the creature, who can’t speak? She is not worthy of a
King!”

After a year had passed, when the Queen brought her first child into
the world, the old woman took it away from her and smeared her mouth
with blood as she slept. Then she went to the King and accused the
Queen of being a man-eater. The King would not believe it, and would
not suffer any one to do her injury. She, however, sat continually
sewing at the shirts, and cared for nothing else.

The next time, when she again bore a beautiful boy, the false old
woman used the same treachery, but the King could not bring himself to
believe her words. He said, “She is too pious and good to do anything
of that kind. If she were not dumb, and could defend herself, her
innocence would come to light.”

But when the old woman stole away the newly-born child for the third
time, and accused the Queen, who did not utter one word of defense, the
King could do no otherwise than deliver her over to justice; and she
was sentenced to be burned.

When the day came for the sentence to be executed, it was the last day
of the six years during which she was not to speak or laugh, and she
had delivered her dear brothers from the power of the enchantment. The
six shirts were ready, only the left sleeve of the sixth was wanting.

When, therefore, she was led to the stake, she laid the shirts on her
arm. And when she stood on high and the fire was just going to be
lighted, she looked around and six Swans came flying through the air
toward her. Then she saw that her deliverance was near, and her heart
leapt with joy.

The Swans swept toward her and sank down so that she could throw the
shirts over them. And as they were touched by them, their swan’s skins
fell off, and her brothers stood in their own form before her, vigorous
and handsome. The youngest lacked only his left arm, and had in its
place a swan’s wing on his shoulder.

They embraced and kissed each other, and the Queen went to the King,
who was greatly moved, and she began to speak, and said, “Dearest
Husband, now I may speak and declare to you that I am innocent, and
falsely accused.” And she told him of the treachery of the old woman
who had taken away her three children, and hidden them.

To the great joy of the King, they were brought back. And as a
punishment, the wicked woman was bound to the stake and burned to ashes.

But the King and the Queen, with their six brothers, lived many years
in happiness and peace.




  

THE POOR MILLER’S BOY AND THE CAT


In a certain mill, lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child.
Three apprentices served under him.

As they had been with him several years, he one day said to them, “I
am old, and want to sit in the chimney-corner. Go out, and whichsoever
of you brings me the best horse, to him will I give the mill. And in
return for it, he shall take care of me till my death.”

The third of the boys was, however, the drudge, who was looked on as
foolish by the others. They begrudged the mill to him, and afterward he
would not have it.

Then all three went out together, and when they came to the village,
the two said to stupid Hans, “You may just as well stay here; as long
as you live you will never get a horse.”

Hans, however, went with them, and when it was night they came to a
cave in which they lay down to sleep. The two sharp ones waited until
Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, and went away leaving him
where he was. They thought they had done a very clever thing, but it
was certain to turn out ill for them.

When the sun arose, and Hans woke up, he was lying in a deep cavern. He
looked around on every side and exclaimed, “Oh, alas! where am I?”

Then he got up and clambered out of the cave, into the forest, thinking:

“Here I am quite alone and deserted, how shall I obtain a horse now?”

Whilst he was thus walking full of thought, he met a small Tabby-Cat
which said quite kindly, “Hans, where are you going?”

“Alas, you cannot help me.”

“I well know your desire,” said the Cat. “You wish to have a beautiful
horse. Come with me, and be my faithful servant for seven years, and
then I will give you a horse more beautiful than any you have ever seen
in your whole life.”

“Well, this is a wonderful Cat!” thought Hans, “but I am determined to
see if she is telling the truth.”

So she took him with her into her enchanted castle, where there were
nothing but cats who were her servants. They leapt nimbly upstairs and
downstairs, and were merry and happy.

In the evening when they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make
music. One played the bassoon, the other the fiddle, and the third put
the trumpet to his lips, and blew out his cheeks as much as he possibly
could.

When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the Cat said,
“Now, Hans, come and dance with me.”

“No,” said he, “I won’t dance with a pussy cat. I have never done that
yet.”

“Then take him to bed,” said she to the cats.

So one of them lighted him to his bedroom, one pulled his shoes off,
one his stockings, and at last one of them blew out the candle.

Next morning they returned and helped him out of bed, one put his
stockings on for him, one tied his garters, one brought his shoes, one
washed him, and one dried his face with her tail.

“That feels very soft!” said Hans.

He, however, had to serve the Cat, and chop some wood every day. And
to do that, he had an axe of silver, while the wedge and saw were of
silver and the mallet of copper. So he chopped the wood small.

He stayed there in the house and had good meat and drink, but never saw
any one but the Tabby-Cat and her servants.

Once she said to him, “Go and mow my meadow, and dry the grass,” and
gave him a scythe of silver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him
deliver them up again carefully.

So Hans went thither, and did what he was bidden, and when he had
finished the work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, and hay to the
house, and asked if it was not yet time for her to give him his reward.

“No,” said the Cat, “you must first do something more for me of the
same kind. There is timber of silver, carpenter’s axe, square, and
everything that is needful, all of silver, with these build me a small
house.”

Then Hans built the small house, and said that he had now done
everything, and still he had no horse.

Nevertheless, the seven years had gone by with him as if they were six
months. The Cat asked him if he would like to see her horses?

“Yes,” said Hans.

Then she opened the door of the small house. And when she had opened
it, there stood twelve horses,--such horses, so bright and shining,
that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them.

And now she gave him to eat and to drink, and said, “Go home. I will
not give you your horse to take away with you. But in three days’ time,
I will follow you and bring it.”

So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill. She had,
however, never once given him a new coat, and he had been obliged to
keep on his dirty old smock-frock, which he had brought with him, and
which during the seven years had everywhere become too small for him.

When he reached home, the two other apprentices were there again, and
each of them certainly had brought a horse with him. But one of them
was blind and the other lame. They asked Hans where his horse was.

“It will follow me in three days’ time.”

Then they laughed and said, “Indeed, stupid Hans! where will you get a
horse? It will be a fine one!”

Hans went into the parlor, but the miller said he should not sit down
to table for he was so ragged and torn, that they would all be ashamed
of him if any one came in. So they gave him a mouthful of food outside.

At night, when they went to rest, the two others would not let him have
a bed, and at last he was forced to creep into the goose-house, and lie
down on a little hard straw.

In the morning, when he awoke, the three days had passed, and a coach
came with six horses and they shone so bright that it was delightful to
see them!--and a servant brought a seventh as well, which was for the
poor miller’s boy.

And a magnificent Princess alighted from the coach, and went into the
mill. And this Princess was the little Tabby-Cat whom poor Hans had
served for seven years.

She asked the miller where the miller’s boy and drudge was.

Then the miller said, “We will not have him here in the mill, he is so
ragged. He is lying in the goose-house.”

Then the King’s Daughter said that they were to fetch him immediately.

So they brought him; and he had to hold his little smock together to
cover himself.

Her servants unpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed
him. And when it was done, no King could have looked more handsome.

Then the Princess desired to see the horses, which the other
apprentices had brought home with them. One of them was blind and the
other lame. So she ordered her servants to bring the seventh horse.

When the miller saw it, he said such a horse as that had never before
entered his yard.

“And that is for the third miller’s boy,” said she.

“Then he must have the mill,” said the miller.

But the Princess said that the horse was for himself, and that he was
to keep his mill as well. Then she took her faithful Hans, set him in
the coach, and drove away with him.

They first drove to the little house, which he had built with the
silver tools. Behold! it was a great castle! Everything inside it was
of silver and gold!

Then she married him; and he was rich, so rich that he had enough for
all the rest of his life.

After this, let no one say that any one who is silly can never become a
person of importance.




  

LITTLE RED-CAP


Once upon a time, there was a sweet little girl, who was loved by every
one who looked at her, and most of all by her Grandmother. There was
nothing that she would not have given the child!

Once she gave her a little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well
that she would not wear anything else. So she was always called Little
Red-Cap.

One day, her Mother said to her, “Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine. Take them to your Grandmother. She is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot. Walk
nicely and quietly. Do not run off the path, or you may fall and break
the bottle; then your Grandmother will get nothing! When you go into
her room, don’t forget to say ‘Good morning,’ and don’t stop to peep
into every corner, before you do it.”

“I’ll take great care,” said Little Red-Cap to her Mother, and gave her
hand on it.

The Grandmother lived in the wood, half an hour’s distance from the
village, and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a Wolf met her.
Red-Cap did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all
afraid of him.

“Good-day, Little Red-Cap,” said he.

“Thank you kindly, Wolf.”

“Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?”

“To my Grandmother’s.”

“What have you got in your apron?”

“Cake and wine. Yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick Grandmother is
to have something good, to make her stronger.”

“Where does your Grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?”

“A good quarter of an hour farther on in the wood. Her house stands
under the three large oak-trees; the nut-trees are just below. You
surely must know it,” replied Little Red-Cap.

The Wolf thought to himself, “What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.”

He walked for a short time by the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he
said, “See, Little Red-Cap, how pretty the flowers are about here--why
do you not look round? I believe, too, that you do not hear how sweetly
the little birds are singing. You walk gravely along as if you were
going to school, while everything else in the wood is merry.”

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams
dancing here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing
everywhere, she thought, “Suppose I take Grandmother a fresh nosegay.
That would please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still
get there in good time.”

And so she ran from the path into the wood to look for flowers. And
whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a still prettier
one farther on, and ran after it, and thus got deeper and deeper into
the wood.

Meanwhile, the Wolf ran straight to the Grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

“Who is there?”

“Little Red-Cap,” replied the Wolf. “She is bringing cake and wine.
Open the door.”

“Lift the latch,” called out the Grandmother, “I am too weak, and
cannot get up.”

The Wolf lifted the latch, the door flew open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the Grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap, laid himself in bed,
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers. When
she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she remembered
her Grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open. And when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling, that she said to
herself, “Oh dear! how uneasy I feel to-day, and at other times I like
being with Grandmother so much.”

She called out, “Good morning,” but received no answer. So she went to
the bed and drew back the curtains. There lay her Grandmother with her
cap pulled far over her face, and looking very strange.

“Oh! Grandmother,” she said, “what big ears you have!”

“The better to hear you with, my Child,” was the reply.

“But, Grandmother, what big eyes you have!” she said.

“The better to see you with, my dear.”

“But, Grandmother, what large hands you have!”

“The better to hug you with.”

“Oh! but Grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!”

“The better to eat you with!” And scarcely had the Wolf said this, than
with one bound he was out of bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the Wolf had satisfied his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself, “How the old woman is snoring! I
must just see if she wants anything.”

So he went into the room, and when he came to the bed, he saw the Wolf
lying in it. “Do I find thee here, thou old sinner!” said he. “I have
long sought thee!”

Then just as he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the
Wolf might have devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be
saved. So he did not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to
cut open the stomach of the sleeping Wolf.

When he had made two snips, he saw the little Red-Cap shining, and then
he made two snips more, and the little girl sprang out, crying, “Ah,
how frightened I have been! How dark it was inside the Wolf!”

And after that the aged grandmother came out alive also, but scarcely
able to breathe.

Red-Cap then quickly fetched great stones with which they filled the
Wolf’s body. And when he awoke, he wanted to run away, but the stones
were so heavy that he tumbled down at once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the Wolf’s skin
and went home with it. The grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine
which Red-Cap had brought, and grew strong again.

But Red-Cap thought to herself, “As long as I live, I will never leave
the path to run into the wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do
so.”




  

KING THRUSHBEARD


A King had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure, but so
proud and haughty withal that no suitor was good enough for her. She
sent away one after the other, and made fun of them as well.

Once the King gave a great feast and invited thereto, from far and
near, all the young men likely to marry. They were marshalled in a row
according to their rank and standing. First came the Kings, then the
Grand-dukes, then the Princes, the Earls, the Barons, and the gentry.

Then the King’s Daughter was led through the ranks, but to every one
she had some objection to make. One was too fat, “The wine-cask,” she
said. Another was too tall, “Long and thin has little in.” The third
was too short, “Short and thick is never quick.” The fourth was too
pale, “As pale as death.” The fifth too red, “A fighting-cock.” The
sixth was not straight enough, “A green log dried behind the stove.”

So she had something to say against every one. But she made herself
especially merry over a good King, who stood quite high up in the row,
and whose chin had grown a little crooked. “Well,” she cried and
laughed, “he has a chin like a thrush’s beak!” and from that time he
got the name of King Thrushbeard.

But the old King, when he saw that his daughter did nothing but mock
people, and despised all the suitors who were gathered there, was very
angry, and swore that she should have for her husband the very first
beggar that came to his doors.

A few days afterward, a fiddler came and sang beneath the windows,
trying to earn a small alms. When the King heard him, he said, “Let him
come up.”

So the fiddler came up, in his dirty, ragged clothes, and sang before
the King and his daughter. When he had ended he asked for a trifling
gift.

The King said, “Your song has pleased me so well that I will give you
my daughter there, to wife.”

The King’s Daughter shuddered, but the King said, “I have taken an oath
to give you to the very first beggar man, and I will keep it.”

All she could say was in vain; the priest was brought, and she had to
let herself be wedded to the fiddler on the spot.

When that was done the King said, “Now it is not proper for you, a
beggar woman, to stay any longer in my palace, you may go away with
your husband.”

The beggar man led her out by the hand, and she was obliged to go away
on foot with him. When they came to a large forest she asked, “To whom
does that beautiful forest belong?”

“It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would have
been yours.”


“Ah, unhappy girl that I am! If I had but taken King Thrushbeard!”

Afterward, they came to a meadow, and she asked again, “To whom does
this beautiful green meadow belong?”

“It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would have
been yours.”

“Ah, unhappy girl that I am! If I had but taken King Thrushbeard!”

Then they came to a large town, and she asked again, “To whom does this
fine large town belong?”

“It belongs to King Thrushbeard. If you had taken him, it would have
been yours.”

“Ah, unhappy girl that I am! If I had but taken King Thrushbeard!”

“It does not please me,” said the fiddler, “to hear you always wishing
for another husband. Am I not good enough for you?”

At last they came to a very little hut, and she said, “Oh, goodness!
what a small house! To whom does this miserable, mean hovel belong?”

The fiddler answered, “That is my house and yours, where we shall live
together.”

She had to stoop in order to go in at the low door. “Where are the
servants?” said the King’s Daughter.

“What servants?” answered the beggar man. “You must do what you wish
to have done. Just make a fire at once, and set on water to cook my
supper. I am quite tired.”

But the King’s Daughter knew nothing about lighting fires or cooking,
and the beggar man had to lend a hand himself to get anything fairly
done. When they had finished their scanty meal they went to bed; but he
forced her to get up quite early in the morning in order to look after
the house.

For a few days, they lived in this way as well as might be, and ate up
all the food in the house.

Then the man said, “Wife, we cannot go on any longer eating and
drinking here and earning nothing. You must weave baskets.”

He went out, cut some willows, and brought them home. Then she began to
weave, but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands.

“I see that this will not do,” said the man; “you had better spin;
perhaps you can do that.”

She sat down and tried to spin, but the hard thread soon cut her soft
fingers so that the blood ran down.

“See,” said the man, “you are fit for no sort of work. I have made a
bad bargain with you. Now, I will try to earn a living by selling pots
and earthenware. You must sit in the market-place and sell the ware.”

“Alas,” thought she, “if any of the people from my father’s kingdom
come to the market and see me sitting there, selling, how they will
mock me!” But it was of no use, she had to yield unless she chose to
die of hunger.

For the first time, she succeeded well, for the people were glad to buy
the woman’s wares because she was good-looking, and they paid her what
she asked. Many even gave her the money and left the pots with her as
well. So they lived on what she had earned as long as it lasted.

Then the husband bought a lot of new crockery. With this she sat down
at the corner of the market-place, and set it around her ready for
sale. But suddenly there came a drunken soldier galloping along, and
he rode right amongst the pots, so that they were all broken into a
thousand bits.

She began to weep, and did not know what to do for fear. “Alas! what
will happen to me?” cried she; “what will my husband say to this?” She
ran home and told him of the misfortune.

“Who would seat herself at a corner of the market-place with crockery?”
said the man. “Leave off crying. I see very well that you cannot do
ordinary work, so I have been to our King’s palace and have asked
whether they cannot find a place for a kitchen-maid. They have promised
me to take you. In that way, you will get your food for nothing.”

The King’s Daughter was now a kitchen-maid, and had to be at the
cook’s beck and call, and do the dirtiest work. In each of her pockets
she fastened a little jar, in which she took home her share of the
leavings, and upon this they lived.

It happened that the wedding of the King’s eldest son was to be
celebrated. So the poor woman went up and placed herself by the door of
the hall to look on. When all the candles were lit, and people, each
more beautiful than the other, entered, and all was full of pomp and
splendor, she thought of her lot with a sad heart, and cursed the pride
and haughtiness which had humbled her, and brought her to so great
poverty.

The smell of the delicious dishes which were being taken in and out
reached her, and now and then the servants threw her a few morsels.
These she put in her jars to take home.

All at once, the King’s Son entered, clothed in velvet and silk,
with gold chains about his neck. And when he saw the beautiful woman
standing by the door he seized her by the hand, and would have danced
with her. But she refused and shrank back with fear, for she saw that
it was King Thrushbeard, her suitor whom she had driven away with scorn.

Her struggles were of no use; he drew her into the hall. But the string
by which her pockets were fastened, broke, the pots fell down, the soup
ran out, and the scraps were scattered all around. And when the people
saw it, there arose laughter and derision, and she was so ashamed that
she would rather have been a thousand fathoms below ground.

She sprang to the door and would have run away, but on the stairs a man
caught her and brought her back. And when she looked at him it was King
Thrushbeard!

He said to her kindly, “Do not be afraid, I and the fiddler who has
been living with you in that wretched hovel are one. For love of you I
disguised myself so. And I, also, was the soldier who rode through your
crockery. This was all done to humble your proud spirit, and to punish
you for the insolence with which you mocked me.”

Then she wept bitterly and said, “I have done great wrong, and am not
worthy to be your wife.”

But he said, “Be comforted. The evil days are past. Now we will
celebrate our wedding.”

Then the maids-in-waiting came, and put the most splendid clothing on
her. Her father and his whole Court arrived, and wished her happiness
in her marriage to King Thrushbeard. And the joy now began in earnest.
I wish you and I had been there too!




  

THE GOLD-CHILDREN


There was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but a little
cottage. They earned their bread by fishing, and always lived from hand
to mouth.

But it came to pass one day, when the man was sitting by the waterside
and casting his net, that he drew out a fish entirely of gold.

As he was looking at the fish, full of astonishment, it began to speak
and said, “Hark you, Fisherman, if you will throw me back again into
the water, I will change your little hut into a splendid castle.”

Then the fisherman answered, “Of what use is a castle to me, if I have
nothing to eat?”

The Gold Fish continued, “That shall be taken care of. There will be a
cupboard in the castle in which, when you open it, shall be dishes of
the most delicate meats, and as many of them as you may desire.”

“If that be true,” said the man, “then I can well do you a favor.”

“Yes,” said the Fish, “there is, however, the condition that you shall
tell no one in the world, whosoever he may be, whence your good luck
has come. If you speak but one single word, all will be over.”

Then the man threw the wonderful Fish back again into the water, and
went home.

Where his hovel had formerly stood, now stood a great castle. He opened
wide his eyes, entered, and saw his wife dressed in beautiful clothes,
sitting in a splendid room.

She was quite delighted, and said, “Husband, how has all this come to
pass? It suits me very well.”

“Yes,” said the man, “it suits me too. But I am frightfully hungry,
just give me something to eat.”

Said the wife, “But I have got nothing and don’t know where to find
anything in this new house.”

“There is no need of your knowing,” said the man, “for I see yonder a
great cupboard, just unlock it.”

When she opened it, lo! there stood cakes, meat, fruit, wine.

Then the woman cried joyfully, “What more can you want, my dear?” and
they sat down, and ate and drank together.

When they had had enough, the woman said, “But, Husband, whence come
all these riches?”

“Alas,” answered he, “do not question me about it, for I dare not tell
you anything. If I disclose it to any one, then all our good fortune
will fly.”

“Very good,” said she, “if I am not to know anything, then I do not
want to know anything.”

However, she was not in earnest. She never rested day or night, and she
goaded her husband until in his impatience he revealed that all was
owing to a wonderful Gold Fish which he had caught, and to which in
return he had given its liberty.

And as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with the
cupboard immediately disappeared. They were once more in the old
fisherman’s hut, and the man was obliged to follow his former trade and
fish.

But fortune would so have it, that he once more drew out the Gold Fish.
“Listen,” said the Fish, “if you will throw me back into the water
again, I will once more give you the castle with the cupboard full of
roast and boiled meats. Only be firm; for your life’s sake don’t reveal
from whom you have it, or you will lose it all again!”

“I will take good care,” answered the fisherman, and threw the fish
back into the water.

Now at home, everything was once more in its former magnificence. The
wife was overjoyed at their good fortune. But curiosity left her no
peace, so that after a couple of days she began to ask again how it had
come to pass, and how he had managed to secure it.

The man kept silence for a short time, but at last she made him so
angry that he broke out and betrayed the secret. In an instant the
castle disappeared, and they were back again in their old hut.

“Now you have got what you want,” said he; “and we can gnaw at a bare
bone again.”

“Ah,” said the woman, “I had rather have no riches; if I am not to know
from whom they come, then I have no peace.”

The man went back to fish, and after a while he chanced to draw out the
Gold Fish for a third time.

“Listen,” said the Fish, “I see very well that I am fated to fall into
your hands. Take me home and cut me into six pieces. Give your wife two
of them to eat, two to your horse, and bury two of them in the ground.
Then they will bring you a blessing.”

The fisherman took the Fish home with him, and did as it had bidden him.

It came to pass that from the two pieces that were buried in the
ground, two Golden Lilies sprang up; that the horse had two Golden
Foals; and the fisherman’s wife bore two children who were made
entirely of gold.

The children grew up, became tall and handsome, and the lilies and
horses grew likewise.

Then the lads said, “Father, we want to mount our Golden Steeds and
travel out in the world.”

But he answered sorrowfully, “How shall I bear it, if you go away and I
know not how it fares with you?”

Then they said, “The two Golden Lilies remain here. By them you may see
how it is with us. If they are fresh, then we are in health. If they
are withered, we are ill. If they perish, then we are dead.”

So they rode forth and came to an inn, in which were many people. They
perceived the Gold-Children and began to laugh, and jeer.

When one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not go out
into the world, but turned back and went home again to his father. But
the other rode forward and reached a great forest.


As he was about to enter it, the people said, “It is not safe for
you to ride through; the wood is full of robbers, who would treat you
badly. You will fare ill. When they see that you are all of gold and
your horse likewise, they will assuredly kill you.”

But he would not allow himself to be frightened, and said, “I must and
will ride through it.”

Then he took bear-skins and covered himself and his horse with them, so
that the gold was not seen, and rode fearlessly into the forest. When
he had ridden onward a little, he heard a rustling in the bushes, and
heard voices speaking together.

From one side came cries of, “There is one!” but from the other, “Let
him go! ’tis an idle fellow, as poor and bare as a church-mouse. What
should we gain from him?”

So the Gold-Child rode joyfully through the forest, and no evil befell
him.

One day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden, who was so
beautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than she
existed in the world.

And as such a mighty love took possession of him, he went up to her and
said, “I love you with my whole heart. Will you be my wife?”

He, too, pleased the maiden so much that she agreed and said, “Yes, I
will be your wife, and be true to you your whole life long.”

They were married. Then just as they were in the greatest happiness,
home came the father of the Bride. When he saw that his daughter’s
wedding was being celebrated, he was astonished, and said, “Where is
the Bridegroom?”

They showed him the Gold-Child, who, however, still wore his bear-skins.

Then the father said wrathfully, “A vagabond shall never have my
daughter!” and was about to kill him.

Then the Bride begged as hard as she could, and said, “He is my
husband, and I love him with all my heart!” until at last he allowed
himself to be appeased.

Nevertheless the idea never left his thoughts, so that next morning he
rose early, wishing to see whether his daughter’s husband was a common
ragged beggar. But when he peeped in, he saw a magnificent golden man
in the bed, and the cast-off bear-skins lying on the ground.

Then he went back, and thought, “What a good thing it was that I
restrained my anger! I should have committed a great crime.”

But the Gold-Child dreamed that he rode out to the chase of a splendid
stag, and when he awoke in the morning, he said to his wife, “I must go
out hunting.”

She was uneasy, and begged him to stay there, and said, “You might
easily meet with a great misfortune.”

But he answered, “I must and will go.”

Thereupon he got up, and rode forth into the forest. It was not long
before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to his dream. He
aimed and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran away. He gave chase
over hedges and ditches for the whole day without feeling tired. In
the evening the stag vanished from his sight, and when the Gold-Child
looked round him, he was standing before a little house, wherein was a
Witch.

He knocked, and a little old woman came out and asked, “What are you
doing so late in the midst of the great forest?”

“Have you not seen a stag?”

“Yes,” answered she, “I know the stag well,” and thereupon a little dog
which had come out of the house with her, barked at the man violently.

“Will you be silent, you odious toad,” said he, “or I will shoot you
dead.”

Then the Witch cried out in a passion, “What! will you slay my little
dog?” and immediately she transformed him, so that he lay like a stone.

Meanwhile his Bride awaited him in vain, and thought, “That which I so
greatly dreaded, which lay so heavily on my heart, has come upon him!”

But at home, the other brother was standing by the Gold-Lilies, when
one of them suddenly drooped. “Alas!” said he, “my brother has met with
some great misfortune! I must away to see if I can possibly rescue him.”

Then he mounted his Golden Horse, and rode forth and entered the great
forest, where his brother lay turned to stone. The old Witch came out
of her house and called him, wishing to entrap him also.

He did not go near her, but said, “I will shoot you, if you do not
bring my brother to life again.”

She touched the stone, though very unwillingly, with her forefinger.
Then he was immediately restored to his human shape.

The two Gold-Children rejoiced, when they saw each other again. They
kissed and caressed each other, and rode away together out of the
forest, the one home to his Bride, the other to his father.

The father then said, “I knew well that you had rescued your brother,
for the Golden Lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again.”

Then they lived happily, and all prospered with them until their death.




  

LITTLE SNOW-WHITE


Once upon a time, in the middle of winter, when the flakes of snow were
falling like feathers from the sky, a Queen sat at a window sewing, and
the frame of the window was made of black ebony.

And whilst she was sewing and looking out of the window at the snow,
she pricked her finger with the needle, and three drops of blood fell
upon the snow. And the red looked pretty upon the white snow, and she
thought to herself, “Would that I had a child as white as snow, as red
as blood, and as black as the wood of the window-frame.”

Soon after that she had a little daughter, who was as white as snow,
and as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony. She was
therefore called little Snow-White. And when the child was born, the
Queen died.

After a year had passed the King took to himself another wife. She
was a beautiful woman, but proud and haughty, and she could not bear
that any one else should surpass her in beauty. She had a wonderful
looking-glass, and when she stood in front of it and looked at herself
in it, and said:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

the Looking-Glass answered:

    “_Thou, O Queen, art the fairest of all!_”

Then she was satisfied, for she knew that the Looking-Glass spoke the
truth.

But little Snow-White was growing up, and grew more and more beautiful.
When she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the day, and more
beautiful than the Queen herself. And once when the Queen asked her
Looking-Glass:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

it answered:

    “_Thou art fairer than all who are here, Lady Queen.
      But more beautiful still is Snow-White, I ween._”

Then the Queen was shocked, and turned yellow and green with envy. From
that hour, whenever she looked at little Snow-White, her heart heaved
in her breast, she hated the maiden so much.

And envy and pride grew higher and higher in her heart like a weed, so
that she had no peace day or night. She called a huntsman, and said,
“Take the child away into the forest. I will no longer have her in my
sight. Kill her.”

The huntsman obeyed, and took her away. But when he had drawn his
knife, and was about to pierce little Snow-White’s innocent heart, she
began to weep, and said, “Ah, dear Huntsman, leave me my life! I will
run away into the wild forest, and never come home again.”

And as she was so beautiful, the huntsman had pity on her and said,
“Run away, then, you poor child.” “The wild beasts will soon have
devoured you,” thought he, and yet it seemed as if a stone had been
rolled from his heart since it was no longer needful for him to kill
her.

But now, the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and so
terrified that she looked at every leaf of every tree, and did not
know what to do. Then she began to run, and ran over sharp stones and
through thorns, and the wild beasts ran past her, but did her no harm.

She ran as long as her feet would go, until it was almost evening. Then
she saw a little cottage and went into it to rest herself. Everything
in the cottage was small, but neater and cleaner than can be told.
There was a table on which was a white cover, and seven little plates,
and on each plate a little spoon. Moreover, there were seven little
knives and forks, and seven little mugs. Against the wall stood seven
little beds side by side, and covered with snow-white counterpanes.

Little Snow-White was so hungry and thirsty, that she ate some
vegetables and bread from each plate and drank a drop of wine out of
each mug, for she did not wish to take all from one only. Then, as she
was so tired, she laid herself down on one of the little beds, but none
of them suited her. One was too long, another too short, but at last
she found that the seventh one was right, so she remained in it, said a
prayer and went to sleep.

When it was quite dark the owners of the cottage came back. They were
seven Dwarfs who dug and delved in the mountains for ore. They lit
their seven candles, and, as it was now light within the cottage, they
saw that some one had been there, for everything was not in the same
order in which they had left it.

The first said, “Who has been sitting on my chair?”

The second, “Who has been eating off my plate?”

The third, “Who has been taking some of my bread?”

The fourth, “Who has been eating my vegetables?”

The fifth, “Who has been using my fork?”

The sixth, “Who has been cutting with my knife?”

The seventh, “Who has been drinking out of my mug?”

Then the first looked round and saw that there was a little hole on his
bed, and he said, “Who has been getting into my bed?”

The others came up and each called out, “Somebody has been lying in my
bed too.”

But the seventh when he looked at his bed saw little Snow-White, who
was lying fast asleep therein. And he called the others, who came
running up, and they cried out with astonishment, and brought their
seven little candles and let the light fall on little Snow-White.

“Oh, oh!” cried they, “what a lovely child!” and they were so glad that
they did not wake her up, but let her sleep on in the bed. And the
seventh Dwarf slept with his companions, one hour with each, and so got
through the night.

The next morning, little Snow-White awoke, and was frightened when she
saw the seven Dwarfs. But they were friendly and asked her what her
name was.

“My name is little Snow-White,” she answered.

“How have you come to our house?” said the Dwarfs.

Then she told them that the wicked Queen had wished to have her
killed, but that the huntsman had spared her life, and that she had run
for the whole day, until at last she had found their dwelling.

The Dwarfs said, “If you will take care of our house, cook, make the
beds, wash, sew, and knit, and if you will keep everything neat and
clean, you may stay with us and you shall want for nothing.”

“Yes,” said little Snow-White, “with all my heart,” and she stayed with
them.

She kept the house in order for them. In the mornings they went to the
mountains and looked for copper and gold, in the evenings they came
back, and then their supper had to be ready.

The maiden was alone the whole day, so the good Dwarfs warned her and
said, “Beware of the Queen, she will soon know that you are here. Be
sure to let no one come in.”

But the Queen, believing that little Snow-White was dead, could not but
think that she herself was again the first and most beautiful of all.
She went to her Looking-Glass, and said:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

and the Glass answered:

    “_Oh, Queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
      But over the hills, where the Seven Dwarfs dwell,
      Little Snow-White is alive and well,
      And none is so fair as she._”

Then she was astounded, for she knew that the Looking-Glass never spoke
falsely, and she knew that the huntsman had betrayed her, for that
little Snow-White was still alive.

And so she thought and thought again how she might kill her, for so
long as she herself was not the fairest in the whole land, envy let her
have no rest. And when she had at last thought of something to do, she
painted her face, and dressed herself like an old pedler-woman, and no
one could have known her.

In this disguise she went over the Seven Mountains to the Seven Dwarfs,
and knocked at the door and cried, “Pretty things to sell, very cheap,
very cheap!”

Little Snow-White looked out at the window, and called, “Good-day, my
dear woman, what have you to sell?”

“Good things, pretty things,” she answered; “stay-laces of all colors,”
and she pulled out one which was woven of bright-colored silk.

“I may let the worthy old woman in,” thought little Snow-White, and she
unbolted the door and bought the pretty laces.

“Child,” said the old woman, “what a fright you look. Come, I will lace
you properly for once.”

Little Snow-White had no suspicion, but stood before her, and let
herself be laced with the new laces. But the old woman laced so quickly
and laced so tightly that little Snow-White lost her breath and fell
down as if dead.

“Now I am the most beautiful,” said the Queen to herself, and ran away.

Not long afterward, in the evening, the Seven Dwarfs came home. But
how shocked they were when they saw their dear little Snow-White lying
on the ground, and that she neither stirred nor moved, and seemed to
be dead. They lifted her up, and, as they saw that she was laced too
tightly, they cut the laces. Than she began to breathe a little, and
after a while came to life again.

When the Dwarfs heard what had happened, they said, “The old
pedler-woman was no one else than the wicked Queen. Take care and let
no one come in when we are not with you.”

But the wicked woman, when she had reached home, went in front of the
Glass and asked:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

and it answered as before:

    “_Oh, Queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
      But over the hills, where the Seven Dwarfs dwell,
      Little Snow-White is alive and well,
      And none is so fair as she._”

When she heard that, all her blood rushed to her heart with fear, for
she saw plainly that little Snow-White was again alive. “But now,” she
said, “I will think of something that shall put an end to you,” and by
the help of witchcraft, which she understood, she made a poisonous comb.

Then she disguised herself, and took the shape of another old woman. So
she went over the Seven Mountains to the Seven Dwarfs, knocked at the
door, and cried, “Good things to sell, cheap, cheap!”

Little Snow-White looked out, and said, “Go away. I cannot let any one
come in.”

“I suppose you may look,” said the old woman, and pulled the poisonous
comb out and held it up.

It pleased the maiden so well that she let herself be beguiled, and
opened the door. When they had made a bargain, the old woman said, “Now
I will comb you properly for once.”

Poor little Snow-White had no suspicion, and let the Old Woman do as
she pleased. But hardly had she put the comb in her hair, then the
poison in it took effect, and the maiden fell down senseless.

“You paragon of beauty,” said the wicked woman, “you are done for now!”
and she went away.

But fortunately it was almost evening, and the Seven Dwarfs came home.
When they saw little Snow-White lying as if dead upon the ground, they
at once suspected the Queen. They looked and found the poisoned comb.
Scarcely had they taken it out, when little Snow-White came to herself,
and told them what had happened. Then they warned her once more to be
upon her guard, and to open the door to no one.

The Queen, at home, went in front of the Glass and said:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

then it answered as before:

    “_Oh, Queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
      But over the hills, where the Seven Dwarfs dwell,
      Little Snow-White is alive and well,
      And none is so fair as she._”

When she heard the Glass speak thus, she trembled and shook with rage.
“Little Snow-White shall die,” she cried, “even if it costs me my life!”

Thereupon she went into a secret, lonely room, where no one ever came,
and there she made a very poisonous apple. Outside it looked pretty,
white with a red cheek, so that every one who saw it longed for it.
But whoever ate a piece of it must surely die.

When the apple was ready, she painted her face, and dressed herself as
a countrywoman, and so she went over the Seven Mountains to the Seven
Dwarfs. She knocked at the door. Little Snow-White put her head out of
the window and said, “I cannot let any one in. The Seven Dwarfs have
forbidden me.”

“It is all the same to me,” answered the woman, “I shall soon get rid
of my apples. There, I will give you one.”

“No,” said little Snow-White, “I dare not take anything.”

“Are you afraid of poison?” said the old woman. “Look, I will cut the
apple in two pieces. You eat the red cheek, and I will eat the white.”

The apple was so cunningly made that only the red cheek was poisoned.
Little Snow-White longed for the fine apple, and when she saw that the
woman ate part of it, she could resist no longer, and stretched out her
hand and took the poisonous half. But hardly had she a bit of it in her
mouth, than she fell down dead.

Then the Queen looked at her with a dreadful look, and laughed aloud,
and said, “White as snow, red as blood, black as ebony-wood! This time
the Dwarfs cannot wake you up again!”

And when she asked of the Looking-Glass at home:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

it answered at last:

    “_Oh, Queen, in this land thou art fairest of all._”

Then her envious heart had rest, so far as an envious heart can have
rest.

The Dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found little Snow-White
lying upon the ground. She breathed no longer and was dead. They lifted
her up, looked to see whether they could find anything poisonous,
unlaced her, combed her hair, washed her with water and wine, but it
was all of no use. The poor child was dead, and remained dead. They
laid her upon a bier, and all seven of them sat round it and wept for
her, and wept three days long.

Then they were going to bury her, but she still looked as if she was
living, and still had her pretty red cheeks. They said, “We could not
bury her in the dark ground,” and they had a transparent coffin of
glass made, so that she might be seen from all sides. They laid her in
it, and wrote her name upon it in golden letters, and that she was a
King’s Daughter.

Then they put the coffin out upon the mountain, and one of them always
stayed by it to watch it. And birds came too, and wept for little
Snow-White; first an owl, then a raven, and last a dove.

And now little Snow-White lay a long, long time in the coffin. She did
not change, but looked as if she were asleep; for she was as white as
snow, as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony.

It happened, however, that a King’s Son came into the forest, and went
to the Dwarfs’ house to spend the night. He saw the coffin on the
mountain, and the beautiful little Snow-White within it, and read what
was written upon it in golden letters.

Then he said to the Dwarfs, “Let me have the coffin. I will give you
whatever you want for it.”

But the Dwarfs answered, “We will not part with it for all the gold in
the world.”

Then he said, “Let me have it as a gift, for I cannot live without
seeing little Snow-White. I will honor and prize her as my dearest
possession,” As he spoke in this way the good Dwarfs took pity upon
him, and gave him the coffin.

And now the King’s Son had it carried away by his servants on their
shoulders. And it happened, that they stumbled over a tree-stump, and
with the shock the poisonous piece of apple, which little Snow-White
had bitten off, came out of her throat. And before long she opened her
eyes, lifted up the lid of the coffin, sat up, and was once more alive.

“Oh, where am I?” she cried.

The King’s Son, full of joy, said, “You are with me,” and told her what
had happened, and said, “I love you more than everything in the world.
Come with me to my father’s palace, you shall be my wife.”

And little Snow-White was willing, and went with him, and their wedding
was held with great show and splendor. But the wicked Queen was also
bidden to the feast. When she had arrayed herself in beautiful clothes,
she went before the Looking-Glass, and said:

    “_Looking-Glass, Looking-Glass, on the wall,
      Who in this land is the fairest of all?_”

the Glass answered:

    “_Oh, Queen, of all here the fairest art thou,
      But the young Queen is fairer by far, I trow!_”

Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so wretched, so utterly
wretched, that she knew not what to do. At first she would not go to
the wedding at all, but she had no peace, and must go to see the young
Queen.

And when she went in she knew little Snow-White. And she stood still
with rage and fear, and could not stir. But iron slippers had already
been put upon the fire, and they were brought in with tongs, and set
before her. Then she was forced to put on the red-hot shoes, and dance
until she dropped down dead.




  

RUMPELSTILTSKIN


Once there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful daughter.
Now it happened that he had to speak to the King, and in order to make
himself appear important he said to him, “I have a daughter who can
spin straw into gold.”

The King said to the miller, “That is an art which pleases me well.
If your daughter is as clever as you say, bring her to-morrow to my
palace, and I will try what she can do.”

And when the girl was brought to him, he took her into a room which was
quite full of straw, gave her a spinning-wheel and a reel, and said,
“Now set to work. If by to-morrow morning early, you have not spun this
straw into gold, you must die.”

Thereupon he himself locked up the room, and left her in it alone. So
there sat the poor miller’s daughter, and for her life could not tell
what to do. She had no idea how straw could be spun into gold; and she
grew more and more miserable, until at last she began to weep.

But all at once the door opened, and in came a Little Man, and said,
“Good evening, Mistress Miller. Why are you crying so?”

“Alas!” answered the girl, “I have to spin straw into gold, and I do
not know how to do it.”

“What will you give me,” said the Little Man, “if I do it for you?”

“My necklace,” said the girl.

The Little Man took the necklace, seated himself in front of the wheel,
and _whirr, whirr, whirr,_ three turns, and the reel was full. Then he
put another on, and _whirr, whirr, whirr,_ three times round, and the
second was full too. And so it went on till the morning, when all the
straw was spun, and all the reels were full of gold.

By daybreak, the King was there, and when he saw the gold, he was
astonished and delighted, but his heart became only more greedy. He had
the miller’s daughter taken into another room full of straw, which was
much larger, and commanded her to spin that also in one night if she
valued her life.

The girl knew not how to help herself, and was crying, when the door
again opened, and the Little Man appeared, and said, “What will you
give me if I spin the straw into gold for you?”

“The ring on my finger,” answered the girl.

The Little Man took the ring, again began to turn the wheel, and, by
morning, had spun all the straw into glittering gold.

The King rejoiced beyond measure at the sight, but still he had not
gold enough. He had the miller’s daughter taken into a still larger
room full of straw, and said, “You must spin this, too, in the course
of this night. But if you succeed, you shall be my wife.” “Even if she
be a miller’s daughter,” thought he, “I could not find a richer wife in
the whole world.”

When the girl was alone the Little Man came again for the third time,
and said, “What will you give me if I spin the straw for you this time
also?”

“I have nothing left that I could give,” answered the girl.

“Then promise me, if you should become Queen, your first child.”

“Who knows whether that will ever happen?” thought the miller’s
daughter. And, not knowing how else to help herself in this difficulty,
she promised the Little Man what he wanted. And for that he once more
span the straw into gold.

And when the King came in the morning, and found all as he had wished,
he took her in marriage. And the pretty miller’s daughter became a
Queen.

A year after, she had a beautiful child, and she never gave a thought
to the Little Man. But suddenly he came into her room, and said, “Now
give me what you promised.”

The Queen was horror-struck, and offered the Little Man all the riches
of the kingdom if he would leave her the child.

But the Little Man said, “No, something that is alive, is dearer to me
than all the treasures in the world.”

Then the Queen began to weep and cry, so that the Little Man pitied
her. “I will give you three days’ time,” said he; “if by that time you
find out my name, then you shall keep your child.”

So the Queen thought the whole night of all the names that she had ever
heard, and she sent a messenger over the country to inquire, far and
wide, for any other names there might be.

When the Little Man came the next day, she began with _Caspar,
Melchior, Balthazar,_ and said all the names she knew, one after
another. But to every one the Little Man said, “That is not my name.”

On the second day, she had inquiries made in the neighborhood as to
the names of the people there. And she repeated to the Little Man
the most uncommon and curious, “Perhaps your name is _Shortribs_, or
_Sheepshanks_, or _Laceleg_?” but he always answered, “That is not my
name.”

On the third day, the messenger came back again, and said, “I have not
been able to find a single new name. But as I came to a high mountain
at the end of the forest, where the fox and the hare bid each other
good night, there I saw a little house. Before the house a fire was
burning, and round about the fire a funny Little Man was jumping. He
hopped upon one leg, and shouted:

    “_To-day I brew, to-morrow I bake,
      And next, I shall the Queen’s child take!
      Ah! well it is, none knows the same--
      That Rumpelstiltskin is my name!_”

You may think how glad the Queen was when she heard the name! And when
soon afterward the Little Man came in, and asked, “Now, Mistress Queen,
what is my name?” she said:

“Is your name _Conrad_?”

“No.”

“Is your name _Harry_?”

“No.”

“Perhaps your name is _Rumpelstiltskin_?”


“The devil has told you that! the devil has told you that!” cried the
Little Man, and in his anger he stamped his right foot so deep into the
earth that his whole leg went in. And then in rage, he pulled at his
left leg so hard with both hands, that he tore himself in two.




  

LITTLE BRIAR-ROSE


A long time ago, there were a King and Queen who said every day, “Ah,
if only we had a child!” but they never had one.

But it happened that once when the Queen was bathing, a Frog crept
out of the water on to the land, and said to her, “Your wish shall be
fulfilled. Before a year has gone by, you shall have a daughter.”

What the Frog had said came true, and the Queen had a little girl, who
was so pretty that the King could not contain himself for joy, and
ordered a great feast. He invited not only his kindred, friends and
acquaintance, but also the Wise Women, in order that they might be kind
and well-disposed toward the child. There were thirteen of them in his
kingdom. But, as he had only twelve golden plates for them to eat out
of, one of them had to be left at home.

The feast was held with all manner of splendor. When it came to an
end the Wise Women bestowed their magic gifts upon the baby. One gave
Virtue, another Beauty, a third Riches, and so on with everything in
the world that one can wish for.

When eleven of them had made their promises, suddenly the thirteenth
came in. She wished to avenge herself for not having been invited, and
without greeting, or even looking at any one, she cried with a loud
voice, “The King’s Daughter, in her fifteenth year, shall prick herself
with a spindle, and fall down dead.” And, without saying a word more,
she turned round and left the room.

They were all shocked. But the twelfth, whose good wish still remained
unspoken, came forward, and as she could not undo the evil sentence,
but only soften it, she said, “It shall not be death, but a deep sleep
of a hundred years, into which the Princess shall fall.”

The King, who wished to keep his dear child from the misfortune,
gave orders that every spindle in the whole kingdom should be burnt.
Meanwhile, the gifts of the Wise Women were fulfilled on the young
girl, for she was so beautiful, modest, sweet tempered, and wise, that
every one who saw her, was bound to love her.

It happened that on the very day, when she was fifteen years old,
the King and Queen were not at home, and the maiden was left in the
palace quite alone. So she went round into all sorts of places, looked
into rooms and bedchambers just as she liked, and at last came to an
old tower. She climbed up the narrow winding-staircase, and reached
a little door. A rusty key was in the lock, and when she turned it
the door sprang open. There in a little room sat an Old Woman with a
spindle, busily spinning flax.

“Good day, old Dame,” said the King’s Daughter; “what are you doing
there?”

“I am spinning,” said the Old Woman, and nodded her head.

“What sort of thing is that, which rattles round so merrily?” said the
maiden, and she took the spindle and wanted to spin too. But scarcely
had she touched the spindle when the magic decree was fulfilled, and
she pricked her finger with it.

And, in the very moment when she felt the prick, she fell down upon the
bed that stood there, and lay in a deep sleep. And this sleep extended
over the whole palace.

The King and Queen, who had just come home, and had entered the great
hall, began to go to sleep, and the whole of the Court with them. The
horses, too, went to sleep in the stable, the dogs in the yard, the
pigeons upon the roof, the flies on the wall. Even the fire, that was
flaming on the hearth, became quiet and slept. The roast meat left off
frizzling, and the cook, who was just going to pull the hair of the
scullery boy, because he had forgotten something, let him go, and went
to sleep. And the wind fell; and on the trees before the castle not a
leaf moved again.

But round about the castle, there began to grow a hedge of thorns.
Every year it became higher, and at last grew close up round the castle
and all over it, so that there was nothing of it to be seen, not even
the flag upon the roof.

But the story of the beautiful sleeping “Briar-Rose,” for so the
Princess was named, went about the country, so that from time to time
Kings’ Sons came and tried to get through the thorny hedge into
the castle. But they found it impossible, for the thorns held fast
together, as if they had hands, and the youths were caught in them,
could not get loose again, and died a miserable death.

After long, long years, again a King’s Son came to that country. He
heard an old man talking about the thorn-hedge, and that a castle was
said to stand behind it in which a wonderfully beautiful Princess,
named Briar-Rose, had been asleep for a hundred years; and that the
King and Queen and the whole Court were asleep likewise. He had heard,
too, from his grandfather, that many Kings’ Sons had come, and had
tried to get through the thorny hedge, but they had remained sticking
fast in it, so had died a pitiful death.

Then the youth said, “I am not afraid. I will go and see the beautiful
Briar-Rose.” The good old man might dissuade him as he would, he did
not listen to his words.

But by this time the hundred years had just passed. The day was come
when Briar-Rose was to awake again. When the King’s Son came near to
the thorn-hedge, it was nothing but large and beautiful flowers, which
parted from each other of their own accord, and let him pass unhurt.
Then they closed again behind him like a hedge.

In the castle-yard he saw the horses and the spotted hounds lying
asleep. On the roof, sat the pigeons with their heads under their
wings. And when he entered the house, the flies were asleep upon the
wall, the cook in the kitchen was still holding out his hand to seize
the boy, and the maid was sitting by the black hen which she was going
to pluck.

He went on farther, and in the great hall he saw the whole of the
Court lying asleep, and by the throne lay the King and Queen.

Then he went on still farther, and all was so quiet that a breath could
be heard. At last he came to the tower, and opened the door into the
little room where Briar-Rose was sleeping. There she lay, so beautiful
that he could not turn his eyes away. He stooped down and gave her a
kiss. But as soon as he kissed her, Briar-Rose opened her eyes and
awoke, and looked at him quite sweetly.

Then they went down together, and the King awoke, and the Queen, and
the whole Court, and gazed at each other in great astonishment. And
the horses in the courtyard stood up and shook themselves. The hounds
jumped up and wagged their tails. The pigeons upon the roof pulled
out their heads from under their wings, looked round, and flew into
the open country. The flies on the wall crept again. The fire in the
kitchen burned up and flickered and cooked the meat. The joint began to
turn and frizzle, and the cook gave the boy such a box on the ear that
he screamed, and the maid plucked the fowl ready for the spit.

And then the marriage of the King’s Son and Briar-Rose was celebrated
with all splendor, and they lived contented to the end of their days.




  

THE THREE LITTLE MEN IN THE WOOD


There was once a man whose wife died, and a woman whose husband died;
and the man had a daughter, and the woman also had a daughter.

The girls were acquainted with each other. They went walking together,
and came to the woman’s house. Then she said to the man’s daughter:

“Listen! Tell your father that I would like to marry him. Then you
shall wash yourself in milk every morning and drink wine; but my own
daughter shall wash herself in water and drink water.”

The girl went home, and told her father what the woman had said. The
man said, “What shall I do? Marriage is a joy, also a torment!”

At last, as he could not decide, he pulled off his boot, and said,
“Take this boot. It has a hole in the sole of it. Go with it upstairs
to the loft. Hang it on the big nail. Then pour water into it. If it
holds the water, then I will again take a wife. But if it runs through,
I will not!”

The girl did as she was ordered, but the water drew the hole together,
and the boot became full to the top. She informed her father how it had
turned out.

Then he himself went up, and when he saw that she was right, he went to
the widow and wooed her, and the wedding was celebrated.

The next morning, when the two girls got up, there stood before the
man’s daughter, milk for her to wash in and wine for her to drink. But
before the woman’s daughter, stood water to wash herself with and water
for drinking.

On the second morning, stood water for washing and water for drinking
before the man’s daughter as well as before the woman’s daughter.

And on the third morning, stood water for washing and water for
drinking before the man’s daughter, and milk for washing and wine for
drinking, before the woman’s daughter, and so it continued.

The woman became bitterly unkind to the man’s daughter, and day by day
did her best to treat her still worse. She was envious too because the
man’s daughter was beautiful and lovable, and her own daughter ugly and
repulsive.

One day, in winter, when everything was frozen as hard as a stone, and
hill and vale lay covered with snow, the woman made a frock of paper,
called the man’s daughter and said, “Here, put on this dress and go out
into the wood, and fetch me a little basketful of strawberries,--I have
a fancy for some.”

“Alas!” said the girl, “no strawberries grow in winter! The ground is
frozen, and besides the snow has covered everything. And why am I to
go in this paper frock? It is so cold outside that one’s very breath
freezes! The wind will blow through the frock, and the thorns will tear
it off my body.”

“Will you contradict me again?” said the woman. “See that you go,
and do not show your face again until you have the basketful of
strawberries!”

Then she gave her a little piece of hard bread, and said, “This will
last you the day,” and thought, “You will die of cold and hunger
outside, and will never be seen again by me.”

Then the girl obeyed, and put on the paper frock, and went out with the
basket. Far and wide there was nothing but snow, and not a green blade
to be seen.

When she got into the wood she saw a small house out of which peeped
three little Dwarfs. She wished them good day, and knocked modestly at
the door. They cried, “Come in,” and she entered the room and seated
herself on the bench by the stove, where she began to warm herself and
eat her breakfast.

The Dwarfs said, “Give us some of it.”

“Willingly,” said she, and divided her bit of bread in two, and gave
them the half.

They asked, “What do you here in the forest in the winter time, in your
thin dress?”

“Ah,” she answered, “I am to look for a basketful of strawberries, and
am not to go home until I can take them with me.”

When she had eaten her bread, they gave her a broom and said, “Sweep
away the snow at the back door with it.”

But when she was outside, the three Little Men said to one another,
“What shall we give her as she is so good, and has shared her bread
with us?”

Then said the first, “My gift is, that every day she shall grow more
beautiful.”

The second said, “My gift is, that gold pieces shall fall out of her
mouth every time she speaks.”

The third said, “My gift is, that a King shall come and take her to
wife.”

The girl, however, did as the Little Men had bidden her, swept away the
snow behind the little house with the broom. And what did she find but
real ripe strawberries, which came up quite dark-red out of the snow!
In her joy she hastily gathered her basket full, thanked the Little
Men, shook hands with each of them, and ran home to take the woman what
she had longed for so much.

When she went in and said good-evening, a piece of gold at once fell
out of her mouth. Thereupon she related what had happened to her in the
wood. But with every word she spoke, gold pieces fell from her mouth,
until very soon the whole room was covered with them.

“Now look at her pride,” cried the woman’s daughter, “to throw about
gold in that way!” but she was secretly envious of it, and wanted to go
into the forest to seek strawberries.

Her mother said, “No, my dear little Daughter, it is too cold, you
might die of cold.”

However, as her daughter let her have no peace, the mother at last
yielded, made her a magnificent dress of fur, which she was obliged to
put on, and gave her bread-and-butter and cake to take with her.

The girl went into the forest and straight up to the little house. The
three Little Men peeped out again, but she did not greet them. Without
looking round at them and without speaking to them, she went awkwardly
into the room, seated herself by the stove, and began to eat her
bread-and-butter and cake.

“Give us some of it,” cried the Little Men.

But she replied, “There is not enough for myself, so how can I give it
away to other people?”

When she had done eating, they said, “There is a broom for you, sweep
all clean for us outside by the back-door.”

“Humph! Sweep for yourselves,” she answered, “I am not your servant.”

When she saw that they were not going to give her anything, she went
out the door. Then the Little Men said to each other, “What shall we
give her as she is so naughty, and has a wicked envious heart, that
will never let her do a good turn to any one?”

The first said, “I grant that she may grow uglier every day.”

The second said, “I grant that at every word she says, a toad shall
spring out of her mouth.”

The third said, “I grant that she may die a miserable death.”

The maiden looked for strawberries outside, but as she found none, she
went angrily home. And when she opened her mouth, and was about to tell
her mother what had happened to her in the wood, with each word she
said, a toad sprang out of her mouth, so that everybody was seized with
horror of her.

Then her mother was still more enraged, and thought of nothing but
how to do every possible injury to the man’s daughter, whose beauty,
however, grew daily greater. At length she took a cauldron, set it on
the fire, and boiled yarn in it. When it was boiled, she flung it on
the poor girl’s shoulder, and gave her an axe in order that she might
go on the frozen river, cut a hole in the ice, and rinse the yarn.

She was obedient, went thither and cut a hole in the ice. And while she
was in the midst of her cutting, a splendid carriage came driving up,
in which sat the King. The carriage stopped, and the King asked, “My
Child, who are you, and what are you doing here?”

“I am a poor girl, and I am rinsing yarn.”

Then the King felt compassion, and when he saw that she was so very
beautiful, he said to her, “Will you go away with me?”

“Ah, yes, with all my heart,” she answered, for she was glad to get
away from the mother and sister.

So she got into the carriage and drove away with the King, and when
they arrived at his palace, the wedding was celebrated with great pomp,
as the Little Men had granted to the maiden.




  

THE GOLDEN BIRD


In the olden time, there was a King, who had behind his palace a
beautiful pleasure-garden, in which there was a tree that bore Golden
Apples. When the apples were getting ripe they were counted, but on the
very next morning one was missing. This was told to the King, and he
ordered that a watch should be kept every night beneath the tree.

The King had three sons, the eldest of whom he sent, as soon as night
came, into the garden. But when it was midnight, he could not keep
himself from sleeping, and next morning again an apple was gone.

The following night, the second son had to keep watch, it fared no
better with him. As soon as twelve o’clock had struck he fell asleep,
and in the morning an apple was gone.

Now, it came to the turn of the third son to watch. He was quite ready,
but the King had not much trust in him, and thought that he would be of
less use than his brothers. But at last he let him go.

The youth lay down beneath the tree, but kept awake, and did not let
sleep master him. When it struck twelve, something rustled through
the air, and in the moonlight he saw a bird coming whose feathers were
shining with gold. The bird alighted on the tree, and had just plucked
off an apple, when the youth shot an arrow at him. The bird flew off,
but the arrow had struck his plumage, and one of his golden feathers
fell down.

The youth picked it up, and the next morning took it to the King and
told him what he had seen in the night. The King called his council
together, and every one declared that a feather like this was worth
more than the whole kingdom.

“If the feather is so precious,” declared the King, “one alone will not
do for me. I must and will have the whole bird!”

The eldest son set out. He trusted to his cleverness, and thought that
he would easily find the Golden Bird. When he had gone some distance he
saw a Fox sitting at the edge of a wood, so he cocked his gun and took
aim at him.

The Fox cried, “Do not shoot me! And in return I will give you some
good counsel. You are on the way to the Golden Bird. This evening you
will come to a village in which stand two inns opposite to one another.
One of them is lighted up brightly, and all goes on merrily within, but
do not enter it. Go rather into the other, even though it seems a bad
one.”

“How can such a silly beast give wise advice?” thought the King’s Son,
and he pulled the trigger. But he missed the Fox, who stretched out his
tail and ran quickly into the wood.

So he pursued his way, and by evening came to the village where the two
inns were. In one they were singing and dancing. The other had a poor,
miserable look.



“I should be a fool, indeed,” he thought, “if I were to go into the
shabby tavern, and pass by the good one.” So he went into the cheerful
one, lived there in riot and revel, and forgot the bird and his father,
and all good counsels.

Some time had passed, and when the eldest son, month after month,
did not come home, the second set out, wishing to find the Golden
Bird. The Fox met him as he had met the eldest, and gave him the good
advice, of which he took no heed. He came to the two inns. His brother
was standing at the window of the one from which came the music, and
called to him. He could not resist, but went inside, and lived only for
pleasure.

Again some time passed, and then the youngest King’s Son wanted to set
off and try his luck. But his father would not allow it. “It is of no
use,” said he, “he will be less likely to find the Golden Bird than his
brothers. And if a mishap were to befall him, he knows not how to help
himself. He is a little wanting at the best.” But at last, as he had no
peace, he let him go.

Again the Fox was sitting outside the wood, and begged for his life,
and offered his good advice. The youth was good-natured, and said, “Be
easy, little Fox, I will do you no harm.”

“You shall not repent it,” answered the Fox; “and that you may proceed
more quickly, get up behind on my tail.”

And scarcely had he seated himself, when the Fox began to run, and
away he went over stock and stone till his hair whistled in the wind.
When they came to the village, the youth got off. He followed the good
advice, and without looking round turned into the little inn, where he
spent the night quietly.

The next morning, as soon as he got into the open country, there sat
the Fox already, and said, “I will tell you further what you have to
do. Go straight forward. At last you will come to a castle, in front
of which a whole regiment of soldiers is lying, but do not trouble
yourself about them, for they will all be asleep and snoring.

“Go through the midst of them straight into the castle. Go through all
the rooms, till at last you will come to a chamber where a Golden Bird
is hanging in a wooden cage. Close by, there stands an empty gold cage
for show. Beware of taking the bird out of the common cage and putting
it into the fine one, or it may go badly with you.”

With these words the Fox again stretched out his tail, and the King’s
Son seated himself upon it. Away he went over stock and stone, till his
hair whistled in the wind.

When he came to the castle he found everything as the Fox had said. The
King’s Son went into the chamber where the Golden Bird was shut up in
a wooden cage, whilst a golden one stood hard by; and the three Golden
Apples lay about the room.

“But,” thought he, “it would be absurd if I were to leave the beautiful
bird in the common and ugly cage,” so he opened the door, laid hold of
it, and put it into the golden cage. But at the same moment the bird
uttered a shrill cry.

The soldiers awoke, rushed in, and took him off to prison. The next
morning he was taken before a court of justice, and as he confessed
everything, was sentenced to death.

The King, however, said that he would grant him his life on one
condition--namely, if he brought him the Golden Horse which ran faster
than the wind. And in that case he should receive, over and above, as a
reward, the Golden Bird.

The King’s Son set off, but he sighed and was sorrowful, for how was he
to find the Golden Horse? But all at once he saw his old friend the Fox
sitting on the road.

“Look you,” said the Fox, “this has happened because you did not give
heed to me. However, be of good courage. I will help you, and tell you
how to get to the Golden Horse. You must go straight on, and you will
come to a castle, where in the stable stands the horse. The grooms will
be lying in front of the stable.

“They will be asleep and snoring, and you can quietly lead out the
Golden Horse. But of one thing you must take heed. Put on him the
common saddle of wood and leather, and not the golden one, which hangs
close by, else it will go ill with you.”

Then the Fox stretched out his tail, the King’s Son seated himself upon
it. Away he went over stock and stone, until his hair whistled in the
wind.

Everything happened just as the Fox had said. The King’s Son came to
the stable in which the Golden Horse was standing, but just as he was
going to put the common saddle upon him, he thought, “It will be a
shame to such a beautiful beast, if I do not give him the good saddle
which belongs to him by right.”

But scarcely had the golden saddle touched the horse than he began to
neigh loudly. The grooms awoke, seized the youth, and threw him into
prison. The next morning he was sentenced by the court to death; but
the King promised to grant him his life, and the Golden Horse as well,
if he would rescue the beautiful Princess from the Golden Castle.

With a heavy heart the youth set out. Yet luckily for him he soon found
the trusty Fox.

“I ought to leave you to your ill-luck,” said the Fox, “but I pity you,
and will help you once more out of your trouble. This road takes you
straight to the Golden Castle. You will reach it by eventide. And at
night, when everything is quiet, the beautiful Princess goes to the
bathing-house to bathe. When she enters it, run up to her and give her
a kiss. Then she will follow you, and you can take her away with you.
Only do not allow her to say farewell to her parents first, or it will
go ill with you.”

Then the Fox stretched out his tail, the King’s Son seated himself upon
it. Away the Fox went, over stock and stone, till his hair whistled in
the wind.

When he reached the Golden Castle it was just as the Fox had said.
He waited until midnight, when everything lay in deep sleep, and the
beautiful Princess was going to the bathing-house. Then he sprang out
and gave her a kiss. She said that she would like to go with him, but
she asked him pitifully, and with tears, to be allowed to take leave of
her parents.

At first he withstood her prayer, but when she wept more and more, and
fell at his feet, he at last gave in. But no sooner had the maiden
reached the bedside of her father, than he and all the rest in the
castle awoke, and the youth was laid hold of and put into prison.

The next morning, the King said to him, “Your life is forfeited, and
you can only find mercy if you take away the hill which stands in
front of my windows, and prevents my seeing beyond it. And you must
finish it all within eight days. If you do that you shall have my
daughter as your reward.”

The King’s Son began, and dug and shovelled without leaving off. But
after seven days when he saw how little he had done, and how all his
work was as good as nothing, he fell into great sorrow and gave up all
hope.

On the evening of the seventh day the Fox appeared and said, “You do
not deserve that I should take any trouble about you. Nevertheless, go
away and lie down to sleep. I will do the work for you.”

The next morning, when he awoke and looked out of the window, the hill
had gone. Full of joy, the youth ran to the King, and told him that the
task was fulfilled. And whether he liked it or not, the King had to
hold to his word and give him his daughter.

So the two set forth together, and it was not long before the trusty
Fox came up with them. “You have certainly got what is best,” said he,
“but the Golden Horse also belongs to the maiden of the Golden Castle.”

“How shall I get it?” asked the youth.

“That I will tell you,” answered the Fox; “first take the beautiful
maiden to the King who sent you to the Golden Castle. There will be
unheard-of rejoicing. They will gladly give you the Golden Horse, and
will bring it out to you.”

All was brought to pass successfully, and the King’s Son carried off
the beautiful Princess on the Golden Horse.

The Fox did not remain behind, and he said to the youth, “Now I will
help you to get the Golden Bird. When you come near to the castle
where the Golden Bird is to be found, let the maiden get down, and I
will take her into my care. Then ride with the Golden Horse into the
castle-yard. There will be great rejoicing at the sight, and they will
bring out the Golden Bird for you.”

When all was accomplished and the King’s Son was about to ride home
with his treasures, the Fox said, “Now you shall reward me for my help.”

“What do you require for it?” asked the youth.

“When you get into the wood yonder, shoot me dead, and chop off my head
and feet.”

“That would be fine gratitude,” said the King’s Son, “I cannot possibly
do that for you.”

The Fox said, “If you will not do it I must leave you. But before I
go away I will give you a piece of good advice. Be careful about two
things. Buy no gallows’-flesh, and do not sit at the edge of any well.”
And then he ran into the wood.

The youth thought, “That is a wonderful beast, he has strange whims.
Who is going to buy gallows’-flesh? and the desire to sit at the edge
of a well has never yet seized me.”

He rode on with the beautiful maiden, and his road took him again
through the village in which his two brothers had remained. There was a
great stir and noise, and, when he asked what was going on, he was told
that two men were going to be hanged. As he came nearer to the place
he saw that they were his brothers, who had been playing all kinds of
wicked pranks, and had squandered their entire wealth. He inquired
whether they could not be set free.

“If you will pay for them,” answered the people; “but why should you
waste your money on wicked men, and buy them free?”

He did not think twice about it, but paid for them. And when they were
set free they all went on their way together.

They came to the wood where the Fox had first met them, and, as it
was cool and pleasant within it, whilst the sun shone hotly, the two
brothers said, “Let us rest a little by the well, and eat and drink.”

He agreed, and whilst they were talking he forgot himself, and sat down
upon the edge of the well without foreboding any evil. But the two
brothers threw him backwards into the well, took the maiden, the Horse,
and the Bird, and went home to their father. “Here we bring you not
only the Golden Bird,” said they; “we have won the Golden Horse also,
and the maiden from the Golden Castle.”

Then was there great joy. But the Horse would not eat, the Bird would
not sing, and the maiden sat and wept.

But the youngest brother was not dead. By good fortune the well was
dry, and he fell upon soft moss without being hurt. But he could not
get out again. Even in this strait, the faithful Fox did not leave him.
He came and leapt down to him, and upbraided him for having forgotten
his advice. “But yet I cannot give it up so,” he said; “I will help you
up again into daylight.” He bade him grasp his tail and keep tight hold
of it; and then he pulled him up.

“You are not out of all danger yet,” said the Fox. “Your brothers were
not sure of your death, and have surrounded the wood with watchers, who
are to kill you if you let yourself be seen.”

But a poor man was sitting upon the road, with whom the youth changed
clothes, and in this way he got to the King’s palace.

No one knew him, but the Bird began to sing, the Horse began to eat,
and the beautiful maiden left off weeping. The King, astonished, asked,
“What does this mean?”

Then the maiden said, “I do not know, but I have been so sorrowful and
now I am so happy! I feel as if my true Bridegroom had come.” She told
him all that had happened, although the other brothers had threatened
her with death if she were to betray anything.

The King commanded that all people, who were in his castle, should
be brought before him; and amongst them came the youth in his ragged
clothes. But the maiden knew him at once and fell upon his neck. The
wicked brothers were seized and put to death, but he was married to the
beautiful maiden and declared heir to the King.

But how did it fare with the poor Fox? Long afterward, the King’s Son
was once again walking in the wood, when the Fox met him and said, “You
have everything now that you can wish for. But there is never an end to
my misery, and yet it is in your power to free me,” and again he asked
him with tears to shoot him dead and to chop off his head and feet.

So he did it, and scarcely was it done when the Fox was changed into a
man, and was no other than the brother of the beautiful Princess, who
at last was freed from the magic charm which had been laid upon him.

And now nothing more was wanting to their happiness as long as they
lived.




  

THE QUEEN BEE


Two King’s Sons once went out in search of adventures, and fell into a
wild, disorderly way of living, so that they never came home again. The
youngest, who was called Simpleton, set out to seek his brothers. When
at length he found them, they mocked him for thinking that he with his
simplicity could get through the world, when they two could not make
their way, and yet were so much cleverer.

They all three traveled away together, and came to an ant-hill. The two
elder wanted to destroy it, to see the little ants creeping about in
their terror, carrying their eggs away, but Simpleton said, “Leave the
creatures in peace. I will not allow you to disturb them.”

Then they went farther, and came to a lake, on which a great number
of ducks were swimming. The two brothers wanted to catch a couple and
roast them, but Simpleton would not permit it, and said, “Leave the
creatures in peace. I will not suffer you to kill them.”

At length they came to a bee’s nest, in which there was so much honey,
that it ran out of the trunk of the tree where it was. The two wanted
to make a fire under the tree, and suffocate the bees in order to take
away the honey, but Simpleton again stopped them and said, “Leave the
creatures in peace. I will not allow you to burn them.”

At last the two brothers arrived at a castle where stone horses were
standing in the stables, and no human being was to be seen. They went
through all the halls until they came to a door in which were three
locks. In the middle of the door there was a little pane, through which
they could see into the room.

There they saw a little Gray Man sitting at a table. They called him,
once, twice, but he did not hear. Then they called him for the third
time, when he got up, opened the locks, and came out. He said nothing
but led them to a handsomely-spread table; and when they had eaten and
drunk, he took each of them to a bedroom.

Next morning, the little Gray Man came to the eldest, beckoned to him,
and conducted him to a stone table, on which were inscribed three
tasks, by the doing of which the castle could be delivered. The first
was that in the forest, beneath the moss, lay the Princess’s pearls,
a thousand in number, which must be picked up. And if by sunset, one
single pearl was wanting, he who had looked for them would be turned to
stone.

The eldest went thither, and sought the whole day, but when it came
to an end, he had found only one hundred, and what was written on the
table came to pass, he was changed into stone.

Next day, the second brother undertook the adventure. It did not,
however, fare much better with him than with the eldest. He did not
find more than two hundred pearls, and was changed to stone.

At last, the turn came to Simpleton, who sought in the moss. But it was
so hard to find the pearls, and he got on so slowly, that he seated
himself on a stone, and wept. And while he was thus sitting, the King
of the Ants, whose life he had once saved, came with five thousand
ants, and before long the little creatures had got all the pearls
together, and laid them in a heap.

The second task was to fetch out of the lake the key of the King’s
Daughter’s bedchamber. When Simpleton came to the lake, the ducks which
he had saved, swam up to him, dived down, and brought the key out of
the water.

But the third task was the most difficult. From amongst the three
sleeping daughters of the King, the youngest and dearest was to be
sought out. They resembled each other exactly, and were only to be
distinguished by their having eaten different sweetmeats before they
fell asleep: the eldest a bit of sugar; the second a little syrup; and
the youngest a spoonful of honey.

Then the Queen of the Bees, which Simpleton had protected from the
fire, came and tasted the lips of all three. At last she remained
sitting on the mouth which had eaten honey; and thus the King’s Son
recognized the right Princess.

Then the enchantment was at an end. Everything was released from sleep,
and those who had been turned to stone received once more their natural
forms. Simpleton married the youngest and sweetest Princess, and after
her father’s death became King, while his two brothers received the two
other sisters.




  

BIRD-FOUND


There was once a forester, who went into the forest to hunt. When he
entered it, he heard a screaming as if a little child was there.

He followed the sound, and at last came to a high tree. In the top of
it a little child was sitting. His mother had fallen asleep under the
tree with the child, and a bird of prey had seen him in her arms, flown
down, and snatched him away, and set him on the high tree.

The forester climbed the tree, and brought the child down. And he
thought to himself, “I will take him home, and bring him up with my
Lina.”

He took him home, and the two children grew up together. The one he had
found in a tree, he called Bird-Found, because a bird had carried it
away.

Bird-Found and Lina loved each other so dearly, that when they did not
see each other they were sad.

The forester, however, had an old cook, who one evening took two pails
and began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times, out
to the spring.

Lina saw this and said, “Hark you, old Sanna, why are you fetching so
much water?”

Then the cook said, “Early to-morrow morning, when the forester is out
hunting, I will heat the water. When it is boiling in the kettle, I
will throw in Bird-Found, and will boil him in it.”

Betimes next morning, the forester got up and went out hunting, and
when he was gone the children were still in bed. Then Lina said to
Bird-Found, “If you will never leave me, I will never leave you.”

Bird-Found said, “Neither now, nor ever, will I leave you.”

Then said Lina, “I will tell you. Last night, old Sanna carried so many
buckets of water into the house that I asked her why she was doing so.
She said that early to-morrow morning, when Father was out hunting, she
would set on the kettle full of water, throw you into it and boil you.
But we will get up quickly, dress ourselves, and go away together.”

The two children, therefore, got up, dressed themselves quickly, and
went away. When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cook came into
the bedroom to fetch Bird-Found and throw him into it. But when she
came in, and went to the beds, both the children were gone.

Then she was terribly frightened, and she said to herself, “What shall
I say now when the forester comes home and sees that the children are
gone? They must be followed instantly and brought back.”

Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run and
overtake the children.

The children, however, were sitting outside the forest, and when they
saw from afar the three servants running, Lina said to Bird-Found,
“Never leave me, and I will never leave you.”

Bird-Found said, “Neither now, nor ever.”

Then said Lina, “Do you become a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.”

When the three servants came to the forest, nothing was there but a
rose-tree and one rose on it; the children were nowhere. Said they,
“There is nothing to be done here,” and they went home and told the
cook that they had seen nothing in the forest but a little rose-bush
with one rose on it.

Then the old cook scolded and said, “You simpletons, you should have
cut the rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and brought it
home with you. Go, and do it at once.”

They had therefore to go out and look for the second time. The
children, however, saw them coming from a distance.

Then Lina said, “Bird-Found, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.”

Bird-Found said, “Neither now, nor ever.”

Said Lina, “Then do you become a church, and I’ll be the chandelier in
it.”

So when the three servants came, nothing was there but a church, with
a chandelier in it. They said therefore to each other, “What can we do
here? Let us go home.” When they got home, the cook asked if they had
not found them. They said no, they had found nothing but a church, and
that there was a chandelier in it.

The cook scolded them and said, “You fools! Why did you not pull the
church to pieces, and bring the chandelier home with you?”

And now the old cook herself got on her legs, and went, with the three
servants, in pursuit of the children. The children saw from afar that
the three servants were coming, and the cook waddling after them.

Then said Lina, “Bird-Found, never leave me, and I will never leave
you.”

Then said Bird-Found, “Neither now, nor ever.”

Said Lina, “Be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.”

The cook, however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she lay
down by it, and was about to drink it up, when she fell into the water,
and there the old Witch had to drown.

Then the children went home together, and were heartily delighted, and
if they are not dead, they are living still.




  

THE GOLDEN GOOSE


There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
Dunderhead, and was despised, mocked, and put down on every occasion.

It happened, that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood.
Before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a bottle
of wine, that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst.

When he entered the forest, there met him a little old Gray Man who
bade him good-day, and said, “Do give me a piece of cake out of your
pocket, and let me have a draught of your wine. I am so hungry and
thirsty.”

But the prudent youth answered, “If I give you my cake and wine, I
shall have none for myself. Be off with you,” and he left the Little
Man standing and went on.

But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he made a
false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm. So he had to go home and
have it bound up. And this was the little Gray Man’s doing.

After this, the second son went into the forest, and his mother gave
him, like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine. The little old Gray
Man met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of
wine. But the second son, too, said with much reason, “What I give you
will be taken away from myself. Be off!” and he left the Little Man
standing and went on.

His punishment, however, was not delayed. When he had made a few
strokes at the tree, he struck himself in the leg. So he had to be
carried home.

Then Dunderhead said, “Father, do let me go and cut wood.”

The father answered, “Your brothers have hurt themselves doing so.
Leave it alone. You do not understand anything about it.”

But Dunderhead begged so long that at last he said, “Go then. You will
get wiser by hurting yourself.”

His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the cinders,
and with it a bottle of sour beer.

When he came to the forest the little old Gray Man met him likewise,
and greeting him said, “Give me a piece of your cake and a drink out of
your bottle. I am so hungry and thirsty.”

Dunderhead answered, “I have only cinder-cake and sour beer. If that
pleases you, we will sit down and eat.”

So they sat down, and when Dunderhead pulled out his cinder-cake, it
was a fine sweet cake, and the sour beer had become good wine.

So they ate and drank, and after that the Little Man said, “Since you
have a good heart, and are willing to divide what you have, I will
give you good luck. There stands an old tree. Cut it down, and you will
find something at the roots.”

Then the old man took leave of him.

Dunderhead went and cut down the tree; and when it fell there was a
Goose sitting in the roots, with feathers of pure gold. He lifted her
up, and taking her with him, went to an inn, where he thought he would
stay the night. Now the host had three daughters, who saw the Goose
and were curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be. And each
wanted one of its feathers.

The eldest thought, “I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a
feather,” and when Dunderhead was gone out, she seized the Goose by the
wing. But her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.

The second came in soon afterward, thinking only of how she might get a
feather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than she
was held fast.

At last, the third came with the like intent, and the others screamed
out, “Keep away! For goodness’ sake keep away!”

But she did not understand why she was to keep away. “The others are
there,” she thought, “I may as well be there too,” and ran to them. But
as soon as she had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to
her. So they had to spend the night with the Goose.

The next morning, Dunderhead took the Goose under his arm and set out,
without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to
it. They were obliged to run after him, now left, now right, just as he
was inclined to go.

In the middle of the fields, the parson met them, and when he saw the
procession he said, “For shame, you good-for-nothing girls! Why are you
running across the fields after this young man? Is that seemly?” At the
same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away.
But as soon as he touched her, he likewise stuck fast, and was obliged
to run behind. Before long, the sexton came by and saw his master, the
parson, running on foot behind three girls. He was astonished at this,
and called out, “Hi! your Reverence! Whither away so quickly? Do not
forget that we have a christening to-day!” and running after him he
took him by the sleeve, but was also held fast.

While the five were trotting thus one behind the other, two laborers
came with their hoes from the fields. The parson called out to them
and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. But they had
scarcely touched the sexton, when they were held fast. And now there
were seven of them running behind Dunderhead and the Goose.

Soon afterward, he came to a city, where a King ruled who had a
daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. So he had
put forth a decree that whosoever should make her laugh should marry
her. When Dunderhead heard this, he went with his Goose and all her
train before the King’s Daughter.

As soon as she saw the seven people running on and on, one behind the
other, she began to laugh very loudly as if she would never leave off.
Thereupon Dunderhead asked to have her for his wife, and the wedding
was celebrated.

After the King’s death, Dunderhead inherited the Kingdom, and lived a
long time contentedly with his wife.




  

MOTHER HOLLE


There was once a widow who had two daughters, one of whom was beautiful
and industrious, whilst the other was ugly and lazy. But she was much
fonder of the ugly and lazy one. Every day, the other, poor girl, had
to sit by a well in the highway, and _spin, spin_ till her fingers bled.

Now it happened, one day, that the shuttle was stained with her blood.
She dipped it in the well to wash the stains off, and it dropped out
of her hand and fell to the bottom. She began to weep, and ran to the
woman, and told her of the mishap.

She scolded her hard, and was so cruel as to say, “Since you have let
the shuttle fall in, you must fetch it out again.”

So the girl went back to the well, and did not know what to do. Then in
the anguish of her heart, she jumped into the well to get the shuttle.
She lost her senses. But when she awoke and came to herself, she was
in a lovely meadow, where the sun was shining and thousands of flowers
were growing.

Along this meadow she went, and at length came to a baker’s oven full
of bread. And the bread cried:

    “_Oh, take me out! Take me out!
      Or I shall burn. I am well baked!_”

So she went up to it, and, with the bread shovel, took out all the
loaves one after the other.

After that, she went on till she came to a tree covered with apples,
and it called to her:

    “_Oh, shake me! Shake me!
      We apples are all ripe!_”

So she shook the tree till the apples fell like rain, and went on
shaking till they were all down. And when she had gathered them into a
heap, she went on her way.

At last, she came to a little house out of which an Old Woman was
peeping. She had such large teeth that the girl was frightened, and was
about to run away.

But the Old Woman called out to her, “What are you afraid of, my Child?
Stay with me. If you will do the work in my house carefully, you shall
be the better for it! Only you must take care to make my bed well, and
to shake it thoroughly till the feathers fly--for then it snows on
earth. I am Mother Holle.”

As the Old Woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl took heart, and
willingly entered her service. She did everything to the Old Woman’s
satisfaction, and always shook her bed so hard that the feathers flew
about like snowflakes. So she lived happily with her, never an angry
word, and boiled or roasted meat every day.

She stayed some time with Mother Holle, then she grew sad. At first she
did not know what was the matter with her, but, by and by, she found
that it was homesickness. Although she was many thousand times better
off here than at home, still she had a longing to be there.

At last, she said to the Old Woman, “I am longing for home. However
well off I am down here, I cannot stay any longer. I must go up again
to my own people.”

Mother Holle said, “I am pleased that you long for your home again. You
have served me so faithfully, that I myself will take you up again.”

Thereupon she took her by the hand, and led her to a large door. The
door was opened, and just as the girl was standing beneath the doorway,
a heavy shower of Gold-Rain fell, and all the gold stuck to her so that
she was covered with it.

“You shall have that because you are so industrious,” said Mother
Holle. And at the same time, she gave her back the shuttle which she
had let fall into the well.

Thereupon the door closed, and the girl found herself again upon the
earth, not far from her mother’s house.

As she went into the yard, the cock was standing by the well, and cried:

    “_Cock-a-doodle-doo!
      Your Golden Girl’s came back to you!_”

So she went into her mother. And as she was thus covered with gold, she
was welcomed by both her and the sister.


The girl told all that had happened to her. As soon as the mother heard
how she had come by such great riches, she was anxious for the same
good fortune to befall her ugly and lazy daughter. She had to seat
herself by the well and spin. And in order that her shuttle might be
stained with blood, she stuck her hand into a thorn-bush, and pricked
her finger. Then she threw her shuttle into the well, and jumped in
after it.

She came like the other to the beautiful meadow, and walked along the
very same path. When she got to the oven, the bread cried again:

    “_Oh, take me out! Take me out!
      Or I shall burn. I am well baked!_”

But the lazy thing answered, “As if I wanted to soil myself!” and on
she went.

Soon she came to the apple-tree, which cried:

    “_Oh, shake me! Shake me!
      We apples are all ripe!_”

But she answered, “I like that! One of you might fall on my head!” and
on she went.

When she came to Mother Holle’s house, she was not afraid, for she had
already heard about her big teeth. She hired herself out immediately.

The first day, she made herself work diligently, and obeyed Mother
Holle, when she told her to do anything, for she was thinking of all
the gold that she would give her.

But on the second day, she began to be lazy, and on the third day stall
more so, for then she would not get up in the morning. Neither did
she make Mother Holle’s bed carefully, nor shake it so as to make the
feathers fly up.

Mother Holle was soon tired of this, and gave her notice to leave.
The lazy girl was willing to go, and thought that now the Gold-Rain
would come. Mother Holle led her to the great doorway. But while she
was standing under it, instead of gold, a big kettleful of pitch was
emptied over her.

“That is the reward of your service,” said Mother Holle, and shut the
door.

So the lazy girl went home. She was covered with pitch, and the cock by
the well, as soon as he saw her, cried out:

    “_Cock-a-doodle-doo!
      Your Pitchy Girl’s come back to you!_”

But the pitch stuck fast to her, and could not be got off so long as
she lived.




  

THE TWO TRAVELERS


Hill and vale do not come together, but the children of men do, good
and bad. In this way a shoemaker and a tailor once met with each other
in their travels.

The tailor was a handsome little fellow who was always merry and full
of enjoyment. He saw the shoemaker coming toward him from the other
side, and as he observed by his bag what kind of a trade he plied, he
sang a little mocking song to him:

      _Sew me the seam,
      Draw me the thread,
      Spread it with pitch,
      Knock the nail on the head._

The shoemaker, however, could not endure a joke. He pulled a face as if
he had drunk vinegar, and made a gesture as if he were about to seize
the tailor by the throat.

But the little fellow began to laugh, reached him his bottle, and said,
“No harm was meant, take a drink, and swallow your anger down.”

The shoemaker took a very hearty drink, and the storm on his face began
to clear away.

He gave the bottle back to the tailor, and said, “I spoke civilly to
you. One speaks well after much drinking, but not after much thirst.
Shall we travel together?”

“All right,” answered the tailor, “if only it suits you to go into a
big town where there is no lack of work.”

“That is just where I want to go,” answered the shoemaker. “In a small
nest there is nothing to earn; and in the country, people like to go
barefoot.”

They traveled therefore onward together, and always set one foot before
the other like a weazel in the snow.

Both of them had time enough, but little to bite and to break. When
they reached a town, they went about and paid their respects to the
tradesmen.

Because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and had such pretty red
cheeks, every one gave him work willingly. And when luck was good, the
master’s daughters gave him a kiss beneath the porch, as well. When he
again fell in with the shoemaker, the tailor had always the most in his
bundle.

The ill-tempered shoemaker made a wry face, and thought, “The greater
the rascal the more the luck.”

But the tailor began to laugh and to sing, and shared all he got with
his comrade. If a couple of pence jingled in his pockets, he ordered
good cheer, and thumped the table in his joy till the glasses danced,
and it was lightly come, lightly go, with him.

When they had traveled for some time, they came to a great forest
through which passed the road to the capital. Two foot-paths, however,
led through it, one of them a seven days’ journey, and the other only
two. But neither of the travelers knew which way was the short one.

They seated themselves beneath an oak-tree, and took counsel together
as to what they should do and for how many days they should provide
themselves with bread.

The shoemaker said, “One must look before one leaps. I will take with
me bread for a week.”

“What!” said the tailor, “drag bread for seven days on one’s back like
a beast of burden, and not be able to look about. I shall trust in God,
and not trouble myself about anything! The money I have in my pocket is
as good in summer as in winter; but in hot weather bread gets dry and
mouldy into the bargain. Even my coat does not go as far as it might.
Besides, why should we not find the right way? Bread for two days, and
that’s enough.”

Each, therefore, bought his own bread. And then they tried their luck
in the forest.

It was as quiet there as in a church. No wind stirred, no brook
murmured, no bird sang, and through the thickly-leaved branches, no
sunbeam forced its way.

The shoemaker spoke never a word, the heavy bread weighed down his back
until the perspiration streamed down his cross and gloomy face.

The tailor, however, was quite merry; he jumped about, whistled on a
leaf, or sang a song, and thought to himself, “God in Heaven must be
pleased to see me so happy.”

This lasted two days, but on the third the forest would not come to an
end, and the tailor had eaten up all his bread, so after all his heart
sank down a yard deeper. In the meantime, he did not lose courage, but
relied on God and on his luck.

On the third day, he lay down in the evening hungry under a tree, and
rose again next morning hungry still.

So also passed the fourth day, and when the shoemaker seated himself on
a fallen tree and devoured his dinner, the tailor was only a looker-on.

If he begged for a little piece of bread the other laughed mockingly,
and said, “You have always been so merry, now you can try for once what
it is to be sad. The birds which sing too early in the morning, are
struck by the hawk in the evening,” in short he was pitiless.

But on the fifth morning, the poor tailor could no longer stand up, and
was hardly able to utter one word for weakness. His cheeks were white,
and his eyes red.

Then the shoemaker said to him, “I will give you a bit of bread to-day,
but in return for it, I will put out your right eye.”

The unhappy tailor, who still wished to save his life, could not do it
in any other way. He wept once more with both eyes, and then held them
out. The shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right eye
with a sharp knife.

The tailor called to remembrance what his mother had formerly said to
him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry, “Eat what one can,
and suffer what one must.”

When he had consumed his dearly-bought bread, he got on his legs again,
forgot his misery and comforted himself with the thought that he could
always see enough with one eye.

But on the sixth day, hunger made itself felt again, and gnawed him
almost to the heart. In the evening he fell down by a tree, and on the
seventh morning he could not raise himself up for faintness, and death
was close at hand.

Then said the shoemaker, “I will show mercy and give you bread once
more, but you shall not have it for nothing. I shall put out your other
eye for it.”

And now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been, prayed to
God for forgiveness, and said, “Do what you will, I will bear what I
must, but remember that our Lord God does not always look on passively,
and that an hour will come when the evil deed, which you have done to
me and which I have not deserved of you, will be requited. When times
were good with me, I shared what I had with you. My trade is of that
kind that each stitch must always be exactly like the other. If I no
longer have my eyes and can sew no more, I must go a-begging. At any
rate, do not leave me here alone when I am blind, or I shall die of
hunger.”

The shoemaker, however, who had driven God out of his heart, took the
knife and put out his left eye. Then he gave him a bit of bread to eat,
held out a stick to him, and drew him on behind him.

When the sun went down, they got out of the forest, and before them in
the open country stood the gallows. Thither the shoemaker guided the
blind tailor, and then left him alone and went his way.

Weariness, pain, and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep, and he
slept the whole night. When day dawned he awoke, but knew not where he
lay.

Two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows, and a crow sat on the
head of each of them. Then one of the men who had been hanged began to
speak, and said, “Brother, are you awake?”

“Yes, I am awake,” answered the second.

“Then I will tell you something,” said the first; “the dew which this
night has fallen down over us from the gallows, gives every one who
washes himself with it, his eyes again. If blind people did but know
this, how many would regain their sight who do not believe that to be
possible!”

When the tailor heard that, he took his pocket-handkerchief, pressed it
on the grass, and when it was moist with dew, washed the sockets of his
eyes with it. Immediately was fulfilled what the man on the gallows had
said, and a couple of healthy new eyes filled the sockets.

It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise behind the
mountains. In the plain before him, lay the great royal city with its
magnificent gates and hundred towers. The golden balls and crosses
which were on the spires began to shine. He could distinguish every
leaf on the trees, saw the birds which flew past, and the midges which
danced in the air. He took a needle out of his pocket, and as he could
thread it as well as ever he had done, his heart danced with delight.

He threw himself on his knees, thanked God for the mercy he had shown
him, and said his morning prayer.

Then he took his bundle on his back, and soon forgot the pain of heart
he had endured, and went on his way singing and whistling.

The first thing he met was a brown foal running about the fields at
large. He caught it by the mane, and wanted to spring on it and ride
into the town.

The foal, however, begged to be set free. “I am still too young,” it
said, “even a light tailor such as you are would break my back in
two--let me go till I have grown strong. A time may come when I can
reward you for it.”

“Run off,” said the tailor, “I see you are still a giddy thing.”

He gave it a touch with a switch over its back, whereupon it kicked up
its hind legs for joy, leapt over hedges and ditches, and galloped away
into the open country.

But the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. “The sun
to be sure fills my eyes,” said he, “but the bread does not fill my
mouth. The first thing that comes across me and is even half eatable,
will have to suffer for it.”

In the meantime a stork stepped solemnly over the meadow toward him.

“Halt, halt!” cried the tailor, and seized him by the leg. “I don’t
know if you are good to eat or not, but my hunger leaves me no great
choice. I must cut your head off, and roast you.”

“Don’t do that,” replied the stork; “I am a sacred bird which brings
mankind great profit, and no one ever does me an injury. Leave me my
life, and I may do you good in some other way.”

“Well, be off, Cousin Longlegs,” said the tailor.

The stork rose up, let its long legs hang down, and flew gently away.

“What’s to be the end of this?” said the tailor to himself at last; “my
hunger grows greater and greater, and my stomach more and more empty.
Whatsoever comes in my way now is lost.”

At this moment, he saw a couple of young ducks which were on a pond,
come swimming toward him.

“You come just at the right moment,” said he, and laid hold of one of
them and was about to wring its neck.

On this an old duck, which was hidden among the reeds, began to scream
loudly and swam to him with open beak, and begged him urgently to spare
her dear children.

“Can you not imagine,” said she, “how your mother would mourn if any
one wanted to carry you off, and give you your death blow?”

“Only be quiet,” said the good-tempered tailor; “you shall keep your
children,” and he put the prisoner back into the water.

When he turned round, he was standing in front of an old tree which was
partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it.

“There I shall at once find the reward of my good deed,” said the
tailor; “the honey will refresh me.”

But the Queen-Bee came out, threatened him and said, “If you touch my
people, and destroy my nest, our stings shall pierce your skin like ten
thousand red-hot needles. But if you will leave us in peace and go your
way, we will do you a service for it another time.”

The little tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done. “Three
dishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinner!” He dragged
himself therefore with his starved-out stomach into the town. It was
just striking twelve, all was ready-cooked for him in the inn, and he
was able to sit down at once to dinner.

When he was satisfied, he said, “Now I will get to work.”

He went round the town, sought a master, and soon found a good
situation. As he had thoroughly learned his trade, it was not long
before he became famous, and every one wanted to have a new coat made
by the little tailor, whose importance increased daily.

“I can go no further in skill,” said he, “and yet things improve every
day.”

At last the King appointed him court-tailor.

But how things do happen in the world! On the very same day his former
comrade, the shoemaker, also became court-shoemaker. When the latter
caught sight of the tailor, and saw that he had once more two healthy
eyes, his conscience troubled him.

“Before he takes revenge on me,” thought he to himself, “I must dig a
pit for him.”

He, however, who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself.

In the evening when work was over and it had grown dusk, he stole to
the King and said, “Lord King, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and has
boasted that he will get the gold crown back again, which was lost in
ancient times.”

“That would please me very much,” said the King.

He caused the tailor to be brought before him next morning, and ordered
him to get the crown back again, or to leave the town for ever.

“Oho!” thought the tailor, “a rogue gives more than he has got. If the
surly King wants me to do what can be done by no one, I will not wait
till morning, but will go out of the town at once, to-day.”

He packed up his bundle, but when he was without the gate, he could not
help being sorry to give up his good fortune and turn his back on the
town in which all had gone so well with him. He came to the pond where
he had made the acquaintance of the ducks.

At that very moment the old one whose young ones he had spared was
sitting there by the shore, pluming herself with her beak. She knew him
again and asked why he was hanging his head.

“You will not be surprised when you hear what has befallen me,” replied
the tailor, and told her his fate.

“If that be all,” said the duck, “we can help you. The crown fell into
the water, and lies at the bottom. We will soon bring it up again for
you. In the meantime just spread out your handkerchief on the bank.”

She dived down with her twelve young ones. And in five minutes she was
up again with the crown resting on her wings. The twelve young ones
were swimming round about and had put their beaks under it, and were
helping to carry it. They all swam to the shore and put the crown on
the handkerchief.

No one can imagine how magnificent the crown was. When the sun shone on
it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles. The tailor tied his
handkerchief together by the four corners, and carried it to the King,
who was full of joy, and put a gold chain round the tailor’s neck.

When the shoemaker saw that one stroke had failed, he contrived a
second, and went to the King and said, “Lord King, the tailor has
become insolent again. He boasts that he will copy in wax the whole of
the royal palace, with everything that pertains to it, loose or fast,
inside and out.”

The King sent for the tailor and ordered him to copy in wax the whole
of the royal palace, with everything that pertained to it, movable
or immovable, within and without. And if he did not succeed in doing
this, or if so much as one nail on the wall were wanting, he should be
imprisoned for his whole life underground.

The tailor thought, “It gets worse and worse! No one can endure that!”
and threw his bundle on his back, and went forth.

When he came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head. The
bees came flying out, and the Queen-Bee asked him if he had a stiff
neck, since he held his head so awry.

“Alas, no,” answered the tailor, “something quite different weighs me
down,” and he told her what the King had demanded of him.

The bees began to buzz and hum amongst themselves, and the Queen-Bee
said, “Just go home again. But come back to-morrow at this time, and
bring a large sheet with you, and then all will be well.”

So he turned back again, but the bees flew to the royal palace and
straight into it through the open windows, crept round about into every
corner, and inspected everything most carefully.

Then they hurried back and modeled the palace in wax with such rapidity
that any one looking on would have thought it was growing before his
eyes. By the evening all was ready.

And when the tailor came next morning, the whole of the splendid
building was there, and not one nail in the wall or tile of the roof
was wanting, and it was delicate withal and white as snow, and smelt
sweet as honey.

The tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it to the King,
who could not admire it enough, placed it in his largest hall, and in
return for it presented the tailor with a large stone house.

The shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went for the third time to
the King and said, “Lord King, it has come to the tailor’s ears that
no water will spring up in the courtyard of the castle. He has boasted
that it shall rise up in the midst of the courtyard to a man’s height
and be clear as crystal.”

Then the King ordered the tailor to be brought before him and said,
“If a stream of water does not rise in my courtyard by to-morrow as
you have promised, the executioner shall in that very place make you
shorter by the head.”

The poor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hurried out to
the gate, and because this time it was a matter of life and death to
him, tears rolled down his face.

Whilst he was thus going forth full of sorrow, the foal to which he
had formerly given its liberty, and which had now become a beautiful
chestnut horse, came leaping toward him.

“The time has come,” it said to the tailor, “when I can repay you for
your good deed. I know already what is needful to you, but you shall
soon have help. Get on me, my back can carry two such as you.”

The tailor’s courage came back to him. He jumped up in one bound; and
the horse went full speed into the town, and right up to the courtyard
of the castle. It galloped as quick as lightning thrice round it, and
at the third time it fell violently down. At the same instant there was
a terrific clap of thunder, a fragment of earth in the middle of the
courtyard sprang like a cannon ball into the air, and over the castle.
Directly after it, a jet of water rose as high as a man on horseback,
and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams began to dance
on it.

When the King saw that he arose in amazement, and went and embraced the
tailor in the sight of all men.

But good fortune did not last long. The King had daughters in plenty,
each one prettier than the other, but he had no son.

So the malicious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the
King, and said, “Lord King, the tailor has not given up his arrogance.
He has now boasted that if he liked, he could cause a son to be brought
to the Lord King through the air.”

The King commanded the tailor to be summoned, and said, “If you cause
a son to be brought to me within nine days, you shall have my eldest
daughter to wife.”

“The reward is indeed great,” thought the little tailor. “One would
willingly do something for it, but the cherries grow too high for me.
If I climb for them, the bough will break beneath me, and I shall fall.”

He went home, seated himself cross-legged on his work-table, and
thought over what was to be done.

“It can’t be managed,” cried he at last. “I will go away. After all I
can’t live in peace here.”

He tied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate. When he got to the
meadow, he perceived his old friend the stork, who was walking backward
and forward like a philosopher. Sometimes he stood still, took a frog
into close consideration, and at length swallowed it down.

The stork came to him and greeted him. “I see,” he began, “that you
have your pack on your back. Why are you leaving the town?”

The tailor told him what the King had required of him, and how he could
not perform it, and lamented his misfortune.

“Don’t let your hair grow gray about that,” said the stork. “I will
help you out of your difficulty. For a long time past, I have carried
the children in swaddling-clothes into the town. So for once, I can
fetch a little Prince out of the well. Go home and be easy. In nine
days from this time repair to the royal palace, and there will I come.”

The little tailor went home, and at the appointed time was at the
castle. It was not long before the stork came flying thither and tapped
at the window. The tailor opened it, and Cousin Longlegs came carefully
in, and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marble pavement.

He had a baby in his beak that was as lovely as an angel, and stretched
out its little hands to the Queen. The stork laid it in her lap, and
she caressed it and kissed it, and was beside herself with delight.

Before the stork flew away he took his traveling bag off his back and
handed it over to the Queen. In it there were little paper parcels
full of colored sweetmeats, and they were divided amongst the little
Princesses.


The eldest, however, had none of them, but got the merry tailor for a
husband.

“It seems to me,” said he, “just as if I had won the highest prize. My
mother was right after all; she always said that whoever trusts in God
and his own fortune can never fail.”

The shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced
at the wedding festival. After which he was commanded to quit the town
for ever.

The road to the forest led him to the gallows. Worn out with anger,
rage, and the heat of the day, he threw himself down. When he had
closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the two crows flew down from
the heads of the men who were hanging there, and pecked his eyes out.

In his madness he ran into the forest and must have died there of
hunger, for no one has ever either seen him again or heard of him.




  

JORINDA AND JORINGEL


There was once an old castle in the midst of a large and thick forest,
and in it an old woman, who was a Witch, dwelt all alone.

In the daytime, she changed herself into a cat or a screech-owl, but
in the evening she took her proper shape again as a human being. She
could lure wild beasts and birds to her, then she killed and boiled and
roasted them.

If any one came within one hundred paces of the castle he was obliged
to stand still, and could not stir from the place until she bade him
be free. But whenever an innocent maiden came within this circle, she
changed her into a bird, shut her up in a wicker-work cage, and carried
the cage into a room in the castle. She had about seven thousand cages
of rare birds in the castle.

Now, there was once a maiden who was called Jorinda, who was fairer
than all other girls. She and a handsome youth named Joringel had
promised to marry each other, and their greatest happiness was being
together.

One day, in order that they might be able to talk together in quiet,
they went for a walk in the forest.

“Take care,” said Joringel, “that you do not go too near the castle.”

It was a beautiful evening. The sun shone brightly between the trunks
of the trees into the dark green of the forest, and the turtledoves
sang mournfully upon the young boughs of the birch-trees.

Jorinda wept now and then. She sat down in the sunshine and was
sorrowful. Joringel was sorrowful too. They were as sad as if they were
about to die. Then they looked around them, and were quite at a loss,
for they did not know by which way to go home. The sun was half above
the mountain and half set.

Joringel looked through the bushes, and saw the old walls of the castle
close at hand. He was horror-stricken and filled with deadly fear.

Jorinda was singing:

    “_My little Bird, with the necklace red,
        Sings sorrow, sorrow, sorrow,
      He sings that the Dove must soon be dead,
        Sings sorrow, sor----jug, jug, jug!_”

Joringel looked for Jorinda. She was changed into a Nightingale, and
sang “_jug, jug, jug!_”

A screech-owl with glowing eyes flew three times round about her, and
three times cried, “_to-whoo, to-whoo, to-whoo!_”

Joringel could not move. He stood there like a stone, and could neither
weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot.

The sun had now set. The owl flew into the thicket. Directly afterward
there came out of it a crooked Old Woman, yellow and lean, with large
red eyes and a hooked nose, the point of which reached to her chin. She
muttered to herself, caught the Nightingale, and took it away in her
hand.

Joringel could neither speak nor move from the spot. The Nightingale
was gone.

At last the woman came back, and said in a hollow voice, “Greet thee,
Zachiel. If the moon shines on the cage, Zachiel, let him loose at
once.”

Then Joringel was freed. He fell on his knees before the woman and
begged that she would give him back his Jorinda. But she said that he
should never have her again, and went away. He called, he wept. He
lamented, but all in vain, “Ah, what is to become of me?”

Joringel went away, and at last came to a strange village. There he
kept sheep for a long time. He often walked round and round the castle,
but not too near to it. One night he dreamt that he found a Blood-Red
Flower, in the middle of which was a beautiful large pearl; that he
picked the flower and went with it to the castle, and that everything
he touched with the flower was freed from enchantment. He also dreamt
that by means of it, he recovered his Jorinda.

In the morning, when he awoke, he began to seek over hill and dale to
find such a flower. He sought until the ninth day, and then, early in
the morning, he found the Blood-Red Flower. In the middle of it, there
was a large dew-drop, as big as the finest pearl.

Day and night, he journeyed with this flower to the castle. When he
was within a hundred paces of it he was not held fast, but walked on to
the door.

Joringel was full of joy. He touched the door with the flower, and it
sprang open. He walked in through the courtyard, and listened for the
sound of the birds. At last he heard it. He went on, and found the room
from whence it came. There the Witch was feeding the birds in the seven
thousand cages.

When she saw Joringel, she was angry, very angry, and scolded and spat
poison and gall, but she could not come within two paces of him. He did
not take any notice of her, but went and looked at the cages with the
birds. But there were many hundred Nightingales, how was he to find his
Jorinda again?

Just then he saw the Old Woman quietly take away a cage with a bird in
it, and go toward the door.

Swiftly he sprang toward her, touched the cage with the flower, and
also the Old Woman.

She could now no longer bewitch any one. And Jorinda was standing
there, clasping him round the neck, and she was as beautiful as ever!




  

HOW SIX MEN GOT ON IN THE WORLD


There was once a man who understood all kinds of arts. He served
in war, and behaved well and bravely, but when the war was over he
received his dismissal, and three farthings for his expenses on the
way. “Stop,” said he, “I shall not be content with this. If I can but
meet with the right people, the King will have to give me all the
treasure of the country.”

Then full of anger he went into the forest, and saw a man standing
therein who had plucked up six trees as if they were blades of corn. He
said to him, “Will you be my servant and go with me?”

“Yes,” he answered, “but, first, I will take this little bundle of
sticks home to my mother,” and he took one of the trees, and wrapped
it round the five others, lifted the bundle on his back and carried it
away.

Then he returned and went with his master, who said, “We two ought to
be able to get through the world very well.”

When they had walked on for a short while they found a huntsman who was
kneeling, had shouldered his gun, and was about to fire. The master
said to him, “Huntsman, what are you going to shoot?”

He answered, “Two miles from here a fly is sitting on the branch of an
oak-tree, and I want to shoot its left eye out.”

“Oh, come with me,” said the man, “if we three are together, we
certainly ought to be able to get on in the world!”

The huntsman was ready, and went with him.

They came to seven windmills whose sails were turning round with great
speed, and yet no wind was blowing either on the right or the left, and
no leaf was stirring. Then said the man, “I know not what is driving
the windmills, not a breath of air is stirring,” and he went onward
with his servants, and when they had walked two miles they saw a man
sitting on a tree, who was shutting one nostril, and blowing out of the
other. “Good gracious! what are you doing up there?”

He answered, “Two miles from here are seven windmills. Look, I am
blowing them till they turn round.”

“Oh, come with me,” said the man. “If we four are together, we shall
carry the whole world before us!”

Then the blower came down and went with him.

After a while they saw a man who was standing on one leg and had taken
off the other, and laid it beside him. Then the master said, “You have
arranged things very comfortably to have a rest.”

“I am a runner,” he replied, “and to stop myself running far too fast,
I have taken off one of my legs, for if I run with both, I go quicker
than any bird can fly.”

“Oh, come with me. If we five are together, we shall carry the whole
world before us.”

So he went with them.

It was not long before they met a man who wore a cap, but had put it
quite on one ear. Then the master said to him, “Gracefully! gracefully!
don’t stick your cap on one ear, you look just like a tom-fool!”

“I must not wear it otherwise,” said he, “for if I set my hat straight,
a terrible frost comes on, and all the birds in the air are frozen, and
drop dead on the ground.”

“Oh, come with me,” said the master. “If we six are together, we can
carry the whole world before us.”

Now the six came to a town where the King had proclaimed that whosoever
ran a race with his daughter and won the victory, should be her
husband, but whosoever lost it, must lose his head.

Then the man presented himself and said, “I will, however, let my
servant run for me.”

The King replied, “Then his life also must be staked, so that his head
and thine are both set on the victory.”

When that was settled and made secure, the man buckled the other leg on
the runner, and said to him, “Now be nimble, and help us to win.”

It was fixed that the one who was the first to bring some water from a
far distant well, was to be the victor. The runner received a pitcher,
and the King’s Daughter one too, and they began to run at the same
time. But in an instant, when the King’s Daughter had got a very little
way, the people who were looking on could see no more of the runner, it
was just as if the wind had whistled by.

In a short time he reached the well, filled his pitcher with water,
and turned back. Half-way home, however, he was overcome with fatigue,
and set his pitcher down, lay down himself, and fell asleep. He had,
however, made a pillow of a horse’s skull which was lying on the
ground, in order that he might lie uncomfortably, and soon wake up
again.

In the meantime, the King’s Daughter, who could also run very
well--quite as well as any ordinary mortal can--had reached the well,
and was hurrying back with her pitcher full of water, and when she saw
the runner lying there asleep, she was glad and said, “My enemy is
delivered over into my hands,” emptied his pitcher, and ran on.

And now all would have been lost if by good luck the huntsman had not
been standing at the top of the castle, and had not seen everything
with his sharp eyes. Then said he, “The King’s Daughter shall still not
prevail against us.”

He loaded his gun, and shot so cleverly, that he shot the horse’s
skull away from under the runner’s head without hurting him. Then the
runner awoke, leapt up, and saw that his pitcher was empty, and that
the King’s Daughter was already far in advance. He did not lose heart,
however, but ran back to the well with his pitcher, again drew some
water, and was still at home again, ten minutes before the King’s
Daughter. “Behold!” said he, “I have not bestirred myself till now. It
did not deserve to be called running before.”

But it pained the King, and still more his daughter, that she should
be carried off by a common disbanded soldier like that. So they took
counsel with each other how to get rid of him and his companions.

Then said the King to her, “I have thought of a way. Don’t be afraid,
they shall not come back again.” And he said to them, “You shall now
make merry together, and eat and drink.”

He conducted them to a room which had a floor of iron, and the doors
also were of iron, and the windows were guarded with iron bars. There
was a table in the room covered with delicious food, and the King said
to them, “Go in, and enjoy yourselves.”

And when they were inside, he ordered the doors to be shut and bolted.
Then he sent for the cook, and commanded him to make a fire under the
room until the iron became red-hot. This the cook did, and the six who
were sitting at table began to feel quite warm, and they thought the
heat was caused by the food. But as it became still greater, and they
wanted to get out, and found that the doors and windows were bolted,
they became aware that the King had an evil intention, and wanted to
suffocate them.

“He shall not succeed, however,” said the one with the cap. “I will
cause a frost to come, before which the fire shall be ashamed, and
creep away.”

Then he put his cap on straight, and immediately there came such a
frost that all heat disappeared, and the food on the dishes began to
freeze.

When an hour or two had passed by, and the King believed that they had
perished in the heat, he had the doors opened to behold them himself.
But when the doors were opened, all six were standing there, alive
and well, and said that they should very much like to get out to warm
themselves, for the very food was fast frozen to the dishes with the
cold.

Then, full of anger, the King went down to the cook, scolded him and
asked why he had not done what he had been ordered to do. But the
cook replied, “There is heat enough there, just look yourself.” Then
the King saw that a fierce fire was burning under the iron room, and
perceived that there was no getting the better of the six in this way.

Again the King considered how to get rid of his unpleasant guests, and
caused their chief to be brought and said, “If you will take gold and
renounce my daughter, you shall have as much as you wish.”

“Oh, yes, Lord King,” he answered, “give me as much as my servant can
carry, and I will not ask for your daughter.”

On this the King was satisfied, and the other continued, “In fourteen
days, I will come and fetch it.”

Thereupon he summoned together all the tailors in the whole kingdom,
and they were to sit for fourteen days and sew a sack. And when it was
ready, the strong one who could tear up trees had to take it on his
back, and go with it to the King.

Then said the King, “Who can that strong fellow be who is carrying a
bundle of linen on his back that is as big as a house?” and he was
alarmed and said, “What a lot of gold he can carry away!”

Then he commanded a ton of gold to be brought. It took sixteen of his
strongest men to carry it, but the strong one snatched it up in one
hand, put it in his sack, and said, “Why don’t you bring more at the
same time?--that hardly covers the bottom!”

Then, little by little, the King caused all his treasure to be brought
thither, and the strong one pushed it into the sack, and still the sack
was not half full with it. “Bring more,” cried he, “these few crumbs
don’t fill it.”

Then seven thousand carts with gold had to be gathered together in the
whole kingdom, and the strong one thrust them and the oxen harnessed to
them into his sack. “I will examine it no longer,” said he, “but will
just take what comes, so long as the sack is but full.”

When all that was inside, there was still room for a great deal
more. Then he said, “I will just make an end of the thing. People do
sometimes tie up a sack even when it is not full.” So he took it on his
back, and went away with his comrades.

When the King now saw how one single man was carrying away the entire
wealth of the country, he became enraged, and bade his horsemen mount
and pursue the six, and ordered them to take the sack away from the
strong one. Two regiments speedily overtook the six, and called out,
“You are prisoners. Put down the sack with the gold, or you will all be
cut to pieces!”

“What say you?” cried the blower, “that we are prisoners! Rather than
that should happen, all of you shall dance about in the air.” And he
closed one nostril, and with the other blew on the two regiments. Then
they were driven away from each other, and carried into the blue sky
over all the mountains--one here, the other there.

One sergeant cried for mercy. He had nine wounds, and was a brave
fellow who did not deserve ill-treatment. The blower stopped a little
so that he came down without injury, and then the blower said to him,
“Now go home to your King, and tell him he had better send some more
horsemen, and I will blow them all into the air.”

When the King was informed of this he said, “Let the rascals go. They
have the best of it.”

Then the six conveyed the riches home, divided it amongst them, and
lived in content until their death.




  

THE GOOSE-GIRL


There was once upon a time, an old Queen, whose husband had been dead
for many years, and she had a beautiful daughter.

When the Princess grew up, she was betrothed to a Prince who lived very
far away. When the time came for her to be married, and she had to
journey forth into the distant kingdom, the aged Queen packed up for
her many costly vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets, also of gold
and silver, and cups and jewels, in short, everything which appertained
to a royal dowry, for she loved her child with all her heart.

She likewise sent her maid-in-waiting, who was to ride with her, and
hand her over to the Bridegroom. Each had a horse for the journey, but
the horse of the King’s Daughter was called Falada, and could speak.

So when the hour of parting had come, the aged mother went into her
bedroom, took a small knife and cut her finger with it until it bled.
Then she held a white handkerchief to it, into which she let three
drops of blood fall.

She gave the handkerchief to her daughter and said, “Dear Child,
preserve this carefully. It will be of service to you on your way.”

So they took a sorrowful leave of each other. The Princess put the
piece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went away to
her Bridegroom.

After she had ridden for a while she felt a burning thirst, and said
to her waiting-maid, “Dismount, and take my cup which you have brought
with you, and get me some water from the stream, for I should like to
drink.”

“If you are thirsty,” said the waiting-maid, “get off your horse
yourself, and lie down and drink out of the water. I don’t choose to be
your servant.”

So in her great thirst the Princess alighted, bent down over the water
in the stream and drank, and was not allowed to drink out of the golden
cup. Then she said, “Ah, Heaven!” and the three drops of blood answered:

    “_If thy Mother only knew,
      ’Twould surely break her heart in two!_”

But the King’s Daughter was humble, said nothing, and mounted her horse
again.

She rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun scorched
her, and she was thirsty once more. When they came to a stream of
water, she again cried to her waiting-maid, “Dismount, and give me some
water in my golden cup,” for she had long ago forgotten the girl’s ill
words.

But the waiting-maid said still more haughtily, “If you wish to drink,
drink as you can, I don’t choose to be your maid.”

Then in her great thirst the King’s Daughter alighted, bent over the
flowing stream, wept and said, “Ah, Heaven!” and the drops of blood
again replied:

    “_If thy Mother only knew,
      ’Twould surely break her heart in two!_”

And as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, the
handkerchief with the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom, and
floated away with the water without her observing it, so great was her
trouble. The waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and she rejoiced to
think that she had now power over the Bride, for since the Princess had
lost the drops of blood, she had become weak and powerless.

So now, when she wanted to mount her horse again, the one that was
called Falada, the waiting-maid said, “Falada is more suitable for me,
and my nag will do for you,” and the Princess had to be content with
that.

Then the waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade the Princess exchange
her royal apparel for her own shabby clothes; and at length she was
compelled to swear by the clear sky above her, that she would not say
one word of this to any one at the Royal Court. And if she had not
taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot. But Falada saw
all this, and observed it well.

The waiting-maid now mounted Falada, and the true Bride the bad horse,
and thus they traveled onward, until they entered the royal palace.
There were great rejoicings over her arrival, and the Prince sprang
forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid from her horse, and
thought she was his Bride. She was conducted up-stairs, but the real
Princess was left standing below.

Then the old King looked out of the window and saw her standing in
the courtyard, and how dainty and delicate and beautiful she was. He
instantly went to the royal apartment, and asked the Bride about the
girl she had with her, who was standing down below in the courtyard,
and who she was.

“I picked her up on my way for a companion. Give the girl something to
work at, that she may not stand idle.”

But the old King had no work for her, and knew of none, so he said, “I
have a little boy who tends the geese, she may help him.”

The boy was called Conrad, and the true Bride had to help him to tend
the geese.

Soon afterward the false Bride said to the young King, “Dearest
Husband, I beg you to do me a favor.”

He answered, “I will do so most willingly.”

“Then send for the butcher, and have the head of the horse on which I
rode here, cut off, for it vexed me on the way.” In reality, she was
afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to the King’s
Daughter.

Then she succeeded in making the King promise that it should be done,
and the faithful Falada was to die. This came to the ears of the real
Princess, and she secretly promised the butcher a piece of gold if he
would perform a small service for her. There was a great dark-looking
gateway in the town, through which, morning and evening, she had to
pass with the geese: would he be so good as to nail up Falada’s head on
it, so that she might see him again? The butcher promised to do that,
and cut off the head, and nailed it fast beneath the dark gateway.

Early in the morning, when she and Conrad drove out their flock beneath
this gateway, she said in passing:

    “_Alas, Falada, hanging there!_”

Then the head answered:

    “_Alas! young Queen, how ill you fare!
      If this your tender Mother knew,
      Her heart would surely break in two!_”

Then they went still farther out of the town, and drove their geese
into the country. And when they had come to the meadow, she sat down
and unbound her hair which was like pure gold. Conrad saw it and
delighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck out a few hairs. Then
she said:

    “_Blow, blow, thou gentle Wind, I say,
      Blow Conrad’s little hat away,
      And make him chase it here and there,
      Until I’ve braided all my hair,
      And bound it up again._”

And there came such a violent wind that it blew Conrad’s hat far away
across county, and he was forced to run after it.

When he came back she had finished combing her hair and was putting
it up again and he could not get any of it. Then Conrad was angry,
and would not speak to her. And thus they watched the geese until the
evening, and then they went home.


Next day when they were driving the geese out through the dark gateway,
the maiden said:

    “_Alas, Falada, hanging there!_”

Falada answered:

    “_Alas! young Queen, how ill you fare!
      If this your tender Mother knew,
      Her heart would surely break in two!_”

And she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her hair.
Conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste:

    “_Blow, blow, thou gentle Wind, I say,
      Blow Conrad’s little hat away,
      And make him chase it here and there,
      Until I’ve braided all my hair,
      And bound it up again._”

Then the wind blew, and blew his little hat off his head and far away,
and Conrad was forced to run after it. When he came back, her hair had
been put up a long time, and he could get none of it. So they looked
after their geese till evening came.

But in the evening, after they had got home, Conrad went to the old
King, and said, “I won’t tend the geese with that girl any longer!”

“Why not?” inquired the old King.

“Oh, because she vexes me the whole day long.”

Then the old King commanded him to relate what it was that she did to
him.

And Conrad said, “In the morning, when we pass beneath the dark gateway
with the flock, there is a sorry horse’s head on the wall, and she says
to it:

   “‘_Alas, Falada, hanging there!_’

And the head replies:

   “‘_Alas! young Queen, how ill you fare!
      If this your tender Mother knew,
      Her heart would surely break in two!_’”

And Conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose-pasture, and
how when there he had to chase his hat.

The old King commanded him to drive his flock out again next day, and
as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the dark gateway, and
heard how the maiden spoke to the head of Falada. Then he went into the
country, and hid himself in the thicket in the meadow. There he soon
saw with his own eyes, the goose-girl and the goose-boy bringing their
flock, and how after a while she sat down and unplaited her hair, which
shone with radiance. And soon she said:

    “_Blow, blow, thou gentle Wind, I say,
      Blow Conrad’s little hat away,
      And make him chase it here and there,
      Until I’ve braided all my hair,
      And bound it up again._”

Then came a blast of wind and carried off Conrad’s hat, so that he had
to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing and plaiting
her hair. All of which the King observed.

Then, quite unseen, he went away, and when the goose-girl came home
in the evening, he called her aside, and asked why she did all these
things.

“I may not tell you that, and I dare not lament my sorrows to any human
being, for I have sworn not to do so by the heaven which is above me.
If I had not done that, I should have lost my life.”

He urged her and left her no peace, but he could draw nothing from her.
Then said he, “If you will not tell me anything, tell your sorrows to
the iron stove there,” and he went away.

Then she crept into the iron stove, and began to weep and lament, and
emptied her whole heart, and said, “Here am I deserted by the whole
world, and yet I am a King’s Daughter, and a false waiting-maid has by
force brought me to such a pass, that I have been compelled to put off
my royal apparel. She has taken my place with my Bridegroom, and I have
to do the mean work of a goose-girl.

    “_If my Mother only knew,
      ’Twould surely break her heart in two!_”

The old King was standing outside by the pipe of the stove, and was
listening to what she said, and heard it. Then he came back again,
and bade her come out of the stove. And royal garments were placed on
her, and it was marvelous how beautiful she was! The old King called
his son, and revealed to him, that he had got the false Bride who was
only a waiting-maid, but that the true one was standing there, as the
goose-girl.

The young King rejoiced with all his heart when he saw her beauty and
youth, and a great feast was made ready to which all the people and all
good friends were invited. At the head of the table sat the Bridegroom
with the King’s Daughter at one side of him, and the waiting-maid on
the other, but the waiting-maid was blinded, and did not recognize the
Princess in her dazzling array.

When they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the old King asked the
waiting-maid as a riddle, what a person deserved who had behaved in
such and such a way to her master, and at the same time related the
whole story, and asked what sentence such a one merited?

Then the false Bride said, “She deserves no better fate than to be put
in a barrel which is studded inside with pointed nails, and two white
horses should be harnessed to it, to drag her along through one street
after another, till she is dead.”

“It is you,” said the old King, “and you have pronounced your own
sentence. Thus shall it be done unto you.”

And when the sentence had been carried out, the young King married his
true Bride, and both of them reigned over their kingdom in peace and
happiness.




  

THE SINGING, SOARING LARK


There was once on a time, a man who was about to set out on a long
journey. At parting he asked his three daughters what he should bring
back for them.

Whereupon the eldest wished for pearls, the second wished for diamonds,
but the third said, “Dear Father, I should like a Singing, Soaring
Lark.”

The father said, “Yes, if I can get it, you shall have it,” kissed all
three, and set out.

Now, when the time had come for him to return home, he had brought
pearls and diamonds for the two eldest. But he had sought everywhere
in vain for a Singing, Soaring Lark for the youngest, and he was very
unhappy about it, for she was his favorite child.

Then his road lay through a forest, and in the midst of it was a
splendid castle. Near the castle stood a tree, and quite on the top of
the tree, he saw a Singing, Soaring Lark.

“Aha, you come just at the right moment!” he said, quite delighted, and
called to his servant to climb up and catch the little creature.

But as he approached the tree, a Lion leapt from beneath it, shook
himself, and roared till the leaves on the tree trembled. “He who tries
to steal my Singing, Soaring Lark,” he cried, “will I devour.”

Then the man said, “I did not know that the bird belonged to you. I
will make amends for the wrong I have done, and ransom myself with a
large sum of money, only spare my life.”

The Lion said, “Nothing can save you, unless you will promise to give
me for mine own what first meets you on your return home. But if you
will do that, I will grant you your life, and you shall have the bird
for your daughter, into the bargain.”

The man hesitated and said, “That might be my youngest daughter, she
loves me best, and always runs to meet me on my return home.”

The servant, however, was terrified and said, “Why should your daughter
be the very one to meet you, it might as easily be a cat, or dog?”

Then the man allowed himself to be persuaded, took the Singing, Soaring
Lark, and promised to give the Lion whatsoever should first meet him on
his return home.

When he reached home and entered his house, the first who met him was
no other than his youngest and dearest daughter, who came running up,
kissed and embraced him. When she saw that he had brought with him a
Singing, Soaring Lark, she was beside herself with joy.

The father, however, could not rejoice, but began to weep, and said,
“My dearest Child, I have bought the little bird at a great cost! In
return for it, I have been obliged to promise you to a savage Lion.
When he has you he will tear you in pieces and devour you,” and he told
her all, just as it had happened, and begged her not to go thither,
come what might.

But she consoled him and said, “Dearest Father, indeed your promise
must be fulfilled. I will go thither and soften the Lion, so that I may
return to you safely.”

Next morning, she had the road pointed out to her, took leave, and went
fearlessly out into the forest. The Lion, however, was an enchanted
Prince and was by day a Lion, and all his people were Lions with him.
But in the night, they resumed their natural human shapes.

On her arrival, she was kindly received and led into the castle. When
night came, the Lion turned into a handsome man, and their wedding
was celebrated with great magnificence. They lived happily together,
remained awake at night, and slept in the daytime.

One day, he came and said, “To-morrow there is a feast in your father’s
house, because your eldest sister is to be married, and if you are
inclined to go there, my Lions shall conduct you.”

She said, “Yes, I should very much like to see my father again,” and
went thither, accompanied by the Lions.

There was great joy when she arrived, for they had all believed that
she had been torn in pieces by the Lion, and had long ceased to live.
But she told them what a handsome husband she had, and how well off she
was. She remained with them while the wedding-feast lasted, and then
went back again to the forest.

When the second daughter was about to be married, and she was again
invited to the wedding, she said to the Lion, “This time, I will not go
alone. You must come with me.”

The Lion, however, said that it was too dangerous for him, for if a ray
from a burning candle should fall on him, he would be changed into a
Dove, and for seven years long would have to fly about with the Doves.

She said, “Ah, but do come with me, I will take great care of you and
guard you from all light.”

So they went away together, and took with them their little child as
well. She had a chamber built, so strong and thick that no ray could
pierce through it. In this he was to shut himself up when the candles
were lit for the wedding-feast. But the door was made of green wood
which warped and left a little crack which no one noticed.

The wedding was celebrated with magnificence; but when the procession
with all its candles and torches came back from church and passed by
this apartment, a ray about the breadth of a hair fell on the King’s
Son. When this ray touched him, he was transformed in an instant. And
when she came in, and looked for him, she did not see him, but a white
Dove was sitting there.

The Dove said to her, “For seven years must I fly about the world, but
at every seventh step that you take I will let fall a drop of red blood
and a white feather. These will show you the way. If you follow the
trace you can release me.”

Thereupon the Dove flew out at the door, and she followed him. At every
seventh step a red drop of blood and a little white feather fell down,
and showed her the way.

So she went continually farther and farther, in the wide world, never
looking about her nor resting, and the seven years were almost past.
Then she rejoiced and thought that they would soon be delivered, and
yet they were so far from it!

Once when they were thus moving onwards, no little feather and no
drop of red blood fell, and when she raised her eyes the Dove had
disappeared. And as she thought to herself, “In this no man can help
me,” she climbed up to the Sun, and said to him, “You shine into every
crevice, and over every peak, have you not seen a white Dove flying?”

“No,” said the Sun, “I have seen none, but I present you with a casket.
Open it when you are in sorest need.”

Then she thanked the Sun, and went on until evening came and the Moon
appeared. She then asked her, “You shine the whole night through, and
on every field and forest, have you not seen a white Dove flying?”

“No,” said the Moon, “I have seen no Dove, but here I give you an egg.
Break it when you are in great need.”

She thanked the Moon, and went on until the Night Wind came up and blew
on her, then she said to it, “You blow over every tree and under every
leaf, have you not seen a white Dove flying?”

“No,” said the Night Wind, “I have seen none, but I will ask the three
other Winds; perhaps they have seen it.”

The East Wind and the West Wind came, and had seen nothing, but the
South Wind said, “I have seen the white Dove, it has flown to the Red
Sea, there it has become a Lion again, for the seven years are over.
The Lion is there fighting with a Dragon. The Dragon, however, is an
enchanted Princess.”

The Night Wind then said to her, “I will advise you. Go to the Red
Sea, on the right bank are some tall reeds, count them, break off the
eleventh, and strike the Dragon with it. Then the Lion will be able
to subdue it, and both then will regain their human form. After that,
look round and you will see the Griffin which is by the Red Sea. Swing
yourself with your beloved, on to his back, and the bird will carry you
over the sea to your own home.

“Here is a nut for you, when you are above the centre of the sea, let
the nut fall. It will immediately shoot up, and a tall nut-tree will
grow out of the water on which the Griffin may rest; for if he cannot
rest, he will not be strong enough to carry you across. If you forget
to throw down the nut, he will let you fall into the sea.”

Then she went thither, and found everything as the Night Wind had said.
She counted the reeds by the sea, and cut off the eleventh, struck the
Dragon with it, whereupon the Lion overcame it. Immediately both of
them regained their human shapes. But when the Princess, who had been
the Dragon, was delivered from enchantment, she took the youth by the
arm, seated herself on the Griffin, and carried him off with her.

There stood the poor maiden, who had wandered so far and was again
forsaken! She sat down and cried, but at last she took courage and
said, “Still I will go as far as the Wind blows and as long as the cock
crows, until I find him.”

She went forth by long, long roads, until at last she came to the
castle, where both of them were living together. There she heard that a
feast was to be held, in which they would celebrate their wedding, but
she said, “God still helps me,” and opened the casket that the Sun had
given her. A dress lay therein as brilliant as the sun itself.

So she took it out and put it on, and went up into the castle, and
every one, even the Bride, looked at her with astonishment. The
dress pleased the Bride so well that she thought it might do for her
wedding-dress, and asked if it was for sale?

“Not for money or land,” answered she, “but for flesh and blood.”

The Bride asked her what she meant by that, then she said, “Let me
sleep a night in the chamber where the Bridegroom sleeps.”

The Bride would not, yet wanted very much to have the dress. At last
she consented, but the page was to give the Prince a sleeping-draught.

When it was night, and the youth was already asleep, she was led into
the chamber. She seated herself on the bed and said, “I have followed
you for seven years. I have been to the Sun and the Moon, and the
Four Winds, and have inquired for you and have helped you against the
Dragon. Will you, then, forget me?”

But the Prince slept so soundly that it only seemed to him as if the
wind were whistling outside in the fir-trees. When therefore day broke,
she was led out again, and had to give up the golden dress. And as that
had been of no avail, she was sad, went out into a meadow, sat down
there, and wept.

While she was sitting there, she thought of the egg which the Moon had
given her. She opened it, and there came out a clucking hen with twelve
chickens all of gold. They ran about chirping, and crept again under
the old hen’s wings. Nothing more beautiful was ever seen in the world!

She arose, and drove them through the meadow. The Bride looked out of
the window, and the little chickens pleased her so that she came down
and asked if they were for sale.

“Not for money or land, but for flesh and blood. Let me sleep again in
the chamber where the Bridegroom sleeps.”

The Bride said, “Yes,” intending to cheat her as on the former evening.
But when the Prince went to bed he asked the page what the murmuring
and rustling in the night had been. On this the page told all; that he
had been forced to give him a sleeping-draught, because a poor girl had
slept secretly in the chamber, and that he was to give him another that
night.

The Prince said, “Pour out the draught by the bedside.”

At night, she was again led in, and when she began to relate how ill
all had fared with her, he immediately recognized his beloved wife by
her voice, sprang up and cried, “Now I really am released! I have been
as it were in a dream, for the strange Princess has bewitched me so
that I have been compelled to forget you! But God has delivered me from
the spell at the right time.”

Then they both left the castle secretly in the night, for they feared
the father of the Princess, who was a sorcerer. They seated themselves
on the Griffin which bore them across the Red Sea. When they were in
the midst of it, she let fall the nut. Immediately a tall nut-tree grew
up, whereon the bird rested, and then carried them home, where they
found their child, who had grown tall and beautiful.

And they lived thenceforth happily until their death.




  

DOCTOR KNOWALL


There was once on a time, a poor peasant called Crab, who drove two
oxen with a load of wood to town, and sold it to a doctor for two
dollars.

When the money was being counted out to him, it so happened that the
doctor was sitting at table, and when the peasant saw how daintily he
ate and drank, his heart desired what he saw, and he would willingly
have been a doctor. So he remained standing a while, and at length
inquired if he, too, could not be a doctor.

“Oh, yes,” said the doctor, “that is soon managed.”

“What must I do?” asked the peasant.

“In the first place, buy yourself an A B C book of the kind which has
a cock on the frontispiece. In the second, turn your cart and your two
oxen into money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever else
pertains to medicine. Thirdly, have a sign painted with the words, ‘I
am Doctor Knowall,’ and have that nailed up above your house-door.”

The peasant did everything that he had been told to do. When he had
doctored people a while, but not long, a rich and great lord had some
money stolen. Then he was told about Doctor Knowall who lived in such
and such a village, and must know what had become of the money. So the
lord had the horses put in his carriage, drove out to the village, and
asked Crab if he were Doctor Knowall?

Yes, he was, he said.

Then he was to go with him and bring back the stolen money.

“Oh, yes, but Grethe, my wife, must go too.”

The lord was willing, and let both of them have a seat in the carriage.
They all drove away together. When they came to the nobleman’s castle,
the table was spread, and Crab was told to sit down and eat.

“Yes, but my wife, Grethe, too,” said he, and he seated himself with
her at the table.

And when the first servant came with a dish of delicate fare, the
peasant nudged his wife, and said, “Grethe, that was the first,”
meaning that was the servant who brought the first dish.

The servant, however, thought he intended by that to say, “That is the
first thief,” and as he actually was so, he was terrified, and said to
his comrade outside, “The doctor knows all! we shall fare badly; he
said I was the first.”

The second did not want to go in at all, but was obliged to. So when he
went in, the peasant nudged his wife, and said, “Grethe, that is the
second.” This servant was so frightened, that he got out.

With the third, it did not fare any better, for the peasant said again,
“Grethe, that is the third.”

The fourth had to carry in a covered dish. In it were crabs.


The lord told the doctor that he must show his skill by guessing what
was under the cover. The doctor looked at the dish, had no idea what
was in it, and cried out, “Alas! poor Crab!”

When the lord heard that, he cried, “There! he knows who has the money!”

At this, the servants were terribly anxious. They winked at the doctor
to come out to them. When he went out, they all four confessed that
they had stolen the money, and that they were willing to restore it.
They led him to the spot where it was hidden.

Thus the lord got back his wealth, and Doctor Knowall received a large
reward and became a famous man.




  

THE BLUE LIGHT


There was once on a time, a soldier who for many years had served the
King faithfully. But when the war came to an end he could serve no
longer because of the many wounds which he had received.

The King said to him, “You may return to your home, I need you no
longer. You will not receive any more money, for only he receives wages
who renders me service for them.”

Then the soldier did not know how to earn a living, went away greatly
troubled, and walked the whole day, until in the evening he entered a
forest. When darkness came on, he saw a light, which he went toward,
and came to a house wherein lived a Witch.

“Do give me one night’s lodging, and a little to eat and drink,” said
he to her, “or I shall starve.”

“Oho!” she answered, “who gives anything to a runaway soldier? Yet will
I be compassionate, and take you in, if you will do what I wish.”

“What do you wish?” said the soldier.

“That you should dig all round my garden for me, to-morrow.”

The soldier consented, and next day labored with all his strength, but
could not finish it by the evening.

“I see well enough,” said the Witch, “that you can do no more to-day.
But I will keep you yet another night, in payment for which you must
to-morrow chop me a load of wood, and make it small.”

The soldier spent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the
Witch proposed that he should stay one night more. “To-morrow, you
shall do me a very trifling piece of work. Behind my house, there is an
old, dry well, into which my light has fallen. It burns blue, and never
goes out, and you shall bring it up again for me.”

Next day, the Old Woman took him to the well, and let him down in a
basket. He found the Blue Light, and made her a signal to draw him
up again. She did draw him up, but when he came near the edge, she
stretched down her hand and wanted to take the Blue Light away from him.

“No,” said he, perceiving her evil intention, “I will not give you the
light, until I am standing with both feet upon the ground.”

The Witch fell into a passion, let him down again into the well, and
went away.

The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and the
Blue Light went on burning. But of what use was that to him? He
saw very well that he could not escape death. He sat for a while
very sorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found his
pipe, which was still half full of tobacco. “This shall be my last
pleasure,” thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the Blue Light and
began to smoke.

When the smoke had circled about the cavern, suddenly a little Black
Man stood before him, and said, “Master, what are your commands?”

“What commands have I to give you?” replied the soldier, quite
astonished.

“I must do everything you bid me,” said the Little Man.

“Good,” said the soldier; “then in the first place help me out of this
well.”

The Little Man took him by the hand, and led him through an underground
passage, but the soldier did not forget to take the Blue Light with
him. On the way the Little Man showed him treasures hidden there, and
the soldier took as much gold as he could carry.

When he was above, he said to the Little Man, “Now go and bind the old
Witch, and carry her before the judge.”

In a short time she, with frightful cries, came riding by, as swift
as the wind, on a wild tom-cat, nor was it long after that before the
Little Man reappeared. “It is all done,” said he, “and the Witch is
already hanging on the gallows. What further commands has my lord?”
inquired the Little Man.

“At this moment, none,” answered the soldier; “you may return home.
Only be at hand immediately, if I summon you.”

“Nothing more is needed than that you should light your pipe at the
Blue Light, and I will appear before you at once.” Thereupon he
vanished from sight.

The soldier returned to the town from which he had come. He went to the
best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade the landlord
furnish him a room as magnificent as possible.

When it was ready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he
summoned the Little Black Man and said, “I have served the King
faithfully, but he has dismissed me, and left me to hunger, and now I
want to punish him.”

“What am I to do?” asked the Little Man.

“Late at night, when the King’s Daughter is in bed, bring her here in
her sleep; she shall do servant’s work for me.”

The Little Man said, “That is an easy thing for me to do, but a very
dangerous thing for you, for if it is discovered, you will fare ill.”

When twelve o’clock had struck, the door sprang open, and the Little
Man carried in the Princess.

“Aha! are you there?” cried the soldier, “get to your work at once!
Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber.”

When she had done this, he ordered her to come to his chair. Then he
stretched out his feet and said, “Pull off my boots for me,” and made
her pick them up again, and clean and brighten them.

She, however, did everything he bade her, without opposition, silently
and with half-shut eyes. When the first cock crowed, the Little Man
carried her back to the royal Palace, and laid her in her bed.

Next morning, when the Princess arose, she went to her father, and told
him that she had had a very strange dream. “I was carried through the
streets with the rapidity of lightning,” said she, “and taken into a
soldier’s room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant, sweep his
room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work. It was only a
dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had done everything.”

“The dream may have been true,” said the King. “I will give you a piece
of advice. Fill your pocket full of peas, and make a small hole in it,
and then if you are carried away again, they will fall out and leave a
track in the streets.”

But unseen by the King, the Little Man was standing beside him when
he said that, and heard all. At night, when the sleeping Princess was
again carried through the streets, some peas certainly did fall out of
her pocket, but they made no track, for the crafty Little Man had just
before scattered peas in every other street. And again the Princess was
compelled to do servant’s work until cock-crow.

Next morning, the King sent his people out to seek the track, but
it was all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting,
picking up peas, and saying, “It must have rained peas, last night.”

“We must think of something else,” said the King; “keep your shoes on
when you go to bed, and before you come back from the place where you
are taken, hide one of them there. I will soon find it.”

The Little Black Man heard this plot, and at night when the soldier
again ordered him to bring the Princess, revealed it to him, and told
him that he knew of no way to overcome this stratagem, and that if the
shoe were found in the soldier’s house it would go badly with him.

“Do what I bid you,” replied the soldier. And again this third night,
the Princess was obliged to work like a servant, but before she went
away, she hid her shoe under the bed.

Next morning, the King had the entire town searched for his daughter’s
shoe. It was found at the soldier’s, and the soldier himself, who at
the entreaty of the Little Man, had gone outside the city-gate, was
soon brought back, and thrown into prison.

In his flight he had forgotten the most valuable things he had, the
Blue Light and the gold, and had only one ducat in his pocket. And now
loaded with chains, he was standing at the window of his dungeon, when
he chanced to see one of his comrades passing by.

The soldier tapped at the pane of glass, and when this man came up,
said to him, “Be so kind as to fetch me the small bundle I have left
lying in the inn, and I will give you a ducat for doing it.”

His comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted. As soon as the
soldier was alone again, he lighted his pipe and summoned the Little
Black Man.

“Have no fear,” said the latter to his master. “Go wheresoever they
take you, and let them do what they will, only take the Blue Light with
you.”

Next day the soldier was tried, and though he had done nothing wicked,
the judge condemned him to death. When he was led forth to die, he
begged a last favor of the King.

“What is it?” asked the King.

“That I may smoke one more pipe on my way.”

“You may smoke three,” answered the King, “but do not imagine that I
will spare your life.”

Then the soldier pulled out his pipe and lighted it at the Blue Light.
And as soon as a few wreaths of smoke had ascended the Little Man was
there with a small cudgel in his hand, and said, “What does my lord
command?”

“Strike down to earth that false judge there, and his constable, and
spare not the King who has treated me so ill.”

Then the Little Man fell on them like lightning, darting this way and
that, and whosoever was so much as touched by his cudgel fell to earth,
and did not venture to stir again. The King was terrified; he threw
himself on the soldier’s mercy, and begged merely to be allowed to
live. He gave him his kingdom for his own, and the Princess to wife.




  

THE SPINDLE, THE SHUTTLE, AND THE NEEDLE


There was once a girl whose father and mother died while she was still
a little child. All alone, in a small house at the end of the village,
dwelt her godmother, who supported herself by spinning, weaving, and
sewing. The old woman took the forlorn child to live with her, kept her
to her work, and educated her in all that is good.

When the girl was fifteen, the old woman became ill, called the child
to her bedside, and said, “Dear Daughter, I feel my end drawing near.
I leave you the little house, which will protect you from wind and
weather, and my spindle, shuttle, and needle, with which you can earn
your bread.”

Then she laid her hands on the girl’s head, blessed her, and said,
“Only preserve the love of God in your heart, and all will go well with
you.”

Thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she was laid in the earth, the
maiden followed the coffin, weeping bitterly, and paid her the last
mark of respect.

And now the maiden lived quite alone in the little house, and was
industrious, and span, wove, and sewed, and the blessing of the good
old woman was on all that she did. It seemed as if the flax in the room
increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove a piece of cloth
or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once found a buyer who paid
her amply for it. So that she was in want of nothing, and even had
something to share with others.

About this time, the Son of the King was traveling about the country
looking for a Bride. He was not to choose a poor one, and did not
want to have a rich one. So he said, “She shall be my wife who is the
poorest, and at the same time the richest.”

When he came to the village where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he
did wherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl in
the place? They first named the richest; the poorest, they said, was
the girl who lived in the small house quite at the end of the village.

The rich girl was sitting in all her splendor before the door of her
house, and when the Prince approached her, she got up, went to meet
him, and made him a low curtsey. He looked at her, said nothing, and
rode on.

When he came to the house of the poor girl, she was not standing at
the door, but sitting in her little room. He stopped his horse, and
saw, through the window on which the bright sun was shining, the girl
sitting at her spinning-wheel, busily spinning. She looked up, and when
she saw that the Prince was gazing in, blushed all over her face, let
her eyes fall, and went on spinning. I do not know whether, just at
that moment, the thread was quite even; but she went on spinning until
the King’s Son had ridden away again.

Then she stepped to the window, opened it, and said, “It is so warm in
this room!” but she still looked after him as long as she could see the
white feathers in his hat. Then she sat down to work again in her own
room and went on with her spinning. And a saying which the old woman
had often repeated when she was sitting at her work, came into her
mind, and she sang these words to herself:

    “_Spindle, my Spindle, haste, haste thee away,
      Here to my house bring the wooer, I pray._”

And what do you think happened? The spindle sprang out of her hand in
an instant, and out of the door. And when, in her astonishment, she got
up and looked after it, she saw that it was dancing out merrily into
the open country, and drawing a shining golden thread after it. Before
long, it had entirely vanished from her sight.

As she had now no spindle, the girl took the weaver’s shuttle in her
hand, sat down to her loom, and began to weave.

The spindle, however, danced continually onward, and just as the thread
came to an end, reached the Prince.

“What do I see?” he cried; “the spindle certainly wants to show me the
way!” He turned his horse about, and rode back with the golden thread.
The girl was, however, sitting at her work singing:

    “_Shuttle, my Shuttle, weave well this day,
      And guide the wooer to me, I pray._”

Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the door.
Before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet which was
more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet beheld. Lilies and
roses blossomed on both sides of it. And on a golden ground in the
centre green branches ascended, under which bounded hares and rabbits.
Stags and deer stretched their heads in between them. Brightly-colored
birds were sitting in the branches above. They lacked nothing but the
gift of song. The shuttle leapt hither and thither, and everything
seemed to grow of its own accord.

As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew. She held the
needle in her hand and sang:

    “_Needle, my Needle, sharp-pointed and fine,
      Prepare for a wooer this house of mine._”

Then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhere about
the room as quick as lightning. It was just as if invisible spirits
were working. They covered tables and benches with green cloth in an
instant, and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silken
curtains.

Hardly had the needle put in the last stitch, than the maiden saw
through the window the white feathers of the Prince, whom the spindle
had brought thither by the golden thread. He alighted, stepped over the
carpet into the house, and when he entered the room, there stood the
maiden in her poor garments, but she shone out from them like a rose
surrounded by leaves.

“You are the poorest and also the richest,” said he to her. “Come with
me, you shall be my Bride.”

She did not speak, but she gave him her hand. Then he kissed her, and
led her forth, lifted her on to his horse, and took her to the royal
castle, where the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicings.

The spindle, shuttle, and needle were preserved in the
treasure-chamber, and held in great honor.




  

THE THREE LUCK-CHILDREN


A father once called his three sons before him. He gave to the first a
cock, to the second a scythe, and to the third a cat.

“I am old,” said he, “my death is nigh, and I have wished to take
thought for you before my end. Money I have not, and what I now give
you seems of little worth. But all depends on your making a sensible
use of it. Only seek out a country where such things are still unknown,
and your fortune is made.”

After the father’s death, the eldest went away with his cock. But
wherever he came the cock was already known. In the towns, he saw him
from a long distance, sitting upon the steeples and turning round with
the wind; and in the villages he heard more than one crowing. No one
would show any wonder at the creature, so that it did not look as if he
would make his fortune by it.


At last, however, it happened that he came to an island where the
people knew nothing about cocks, and did not even understand how to
tell time. They certainly knew when it was morning or evening. But
at night, if they did not sleep through it, not one of them knew how to
find out the time.

“Look!” said he, “what a proud creature! It has a ruby-red crown upon
its head, and wears spurs like a knight. It calls you three times
during the night, at fixed hours; and when it calls for the last time,
the sun soon after rises. But if it crows by broad daylight, then take
notice, for there will certainly be a change of weather.”

The people were well pleased. For a whole night they did not sleep, and
listened with great delight as the cock at two, four, and six o’clock,
loudly and clearly proclaimed the time. They asked if the creature were
for sale, and how much he wanted for it.

“About as much gold as an ass can carry,” answered he.

“A ridiculously small price for such a precious creature!” they cried
all together, and willingly gave him what he had asked.

When he came home with his wealth, his brothers were astonished, and
the second said, “Well, I will go forth and see whether I cannot get
rid of my scythe as profitably.” But it did not look as if he would,
for laborers met him everywhere, and they had scythes upon their
shoulders as well as he.

At last, however, he chanced upon an island where the people knew
nothing of scythes. When the corn was ripe, they took cannon out to
the fields and shot it down. Now this was rather an uncertain affair.
Many shot right over it, others hit the ears instead of the stems and
shot them away, whereby much was lost; and besides all this it made a
terrible noise.

So the man set to work and mowed it down so quietly and quickly that
the people opened their mouths with astonishment. They agreed to give
him what he wanted for the scythe, and he received a horse laden with
as much gold as it could carry.

And now the third brother wanted to take his cat to the right man. He
fared just like the others. So long as he stayed on the mainland, there
was nothing to be done. Every place had cats, and there were so many of
them that most new-born kittens were drowned in the ponds.

At last, he sailed to an island, and it luckily happened that no cats
had ever yet been seen there, and that the mice had got the upper
hand so much, that they danced upon the tables and benches whether
the master were at home or not. The people complained bitterly of the
plague. The King himself, in his palace, did not know how to secure
himself against them. Mice squeaked in every corner, and gnawed
whatever they could lay hold of with their teeth.

But now the cat began her chase, and soon cleared a couple of rooms,
and the people begged the King to buy the wonderful beast for the
country. The King willingly gave what was asked, which was a mule laden
with gold; and the third brother came home with the greatest treasure
of all.

The cat made merry with the mice in the royal palace, and killed so
many that they could not be counted. At last she grew warm with the
work and thirsty, so she stood still, lifted up her head and cried,
“Mew! mew!”

When they heard this strange cry, the King and all his people were
frightened, and in their terror ran out of the palace.

Then the King took counsel what was best to be done. At last, it was
decided to send a herald to the cat, and command her to leave the
palace; if not, she was to expect that force would be used against her.

The councilors said, “We would rather be plagued with mice to which
misfortune we are accustomed, than give up our lives to such a monster
as this.”

A noble youth, therefore, was sent to ask the cat whether she “would
peaceably quit the palace.” But the cat, whose thirst had become still
greater, answered again, “Mew! Mew!”

The youth thought that she said, “Most certainly not! Most certainly
not!” and took this answer to the King.

“Then,” said the councilors, “she must yield to force.”

Cannon were brought out, and the palace was soon in flames. When the
fire reached the room where the cat was sitting, she sprang safely out
of the window. But the besiegers did not leave off, until the whole
palace was shot down to the ground.




  

THE DONKEY CABBAGES


There was once a young huntsman, who went into the forest to lie in
wait. He had a fresh and joyous heart, and as he was going thither,
whistling upon a leaf, an ugly old crone came up, who spoke to him and
said, “Good-day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry and contented, but
I am suffering from hunger and thirst, do give me an alms.”

The huntsman had compassion on the poor old creature, felt in his
pocket, and gave her what he could afford.

He was then about to go further, but the old woman stopped him and
said, “Listen, dear Huntsman, to what I tell you. I will make you a
present in return for your kindness. Go on your way now, but in a
little while you will come to a tree, whereon nine birds are sitting
which have a cloak in their claws, and are plucking at it. Take your
gun and shoot into the midst of them. They will let the cloak fall down
to you, but one of the birds will be hurt, and will drop dead.

“Carry away the cloak, it is a Wishing-Cloak. When you throw it over
your shoulders, you only have to wish to be in a certain place, and you
will be there in the twinkling of an eye. Take out the heart of the
dead bird, swallow it whole, and every morning early, when you get up,
you will find a gold piece under your pillow.”

The huntsman thanked the Wise Woman, and thought to himself, “Those are
fine things that she has promised me, if all does but come true!”

And verily when he had walked about a hundred paces, he heard in the
branches above him a screaming and twittering. He looked up and saw a
crowd of birds, who were tearing a piece of cloth with their beaks and
claws, and tugging and fighting as if each wanted to have it all to
himself.

“Well,” said the huntsman, “this is wonderful. It has come to pass just
as the old wife foretold!” and he took the gun from his shoulder, aimed
and fired right into the midst of them, so that the feathers flew about.

The birds instantly took to flight with loud outcries, but one dropped
down dead, and the cloak fell at the same time. Then the huntsman did
as the old woman had directed him, cut open the bird, sought the heart,
swallowed it down, and took the cloak home with him.

Next morning, when he awoke, the promise occurred to him. He wished to
see if it also had been fulfilled. When he lifted up the pillow, the
gold piece shone in his eyes. The next day, he found another, and so
it went on, every time he got up. He gathered together a heap of gold,
but at last he thought, “Of what use is all my gold to me if I stay at
home? I will go forth and see the world.”

He then took leave of his parents, buckled on his huntsman’s pouch and
gun, and went out into the world.

It came to pass, that one day he traveled through a dense forest, and
when he came to the end of it, in the plain before him was a fine
castle. An Old Woman was standing with a wonderfully beautiful maiden,
looking out of one of the windows.

The Old Woman, however, was a Witch and said to the maiden, “There
comes a man out of the forest, who has a wonderful treasure in his
body. We must filch it from him, my dear Daughter. It is more suitable
for us than for him. He has a bird’s heart about him, by means of which
every morning, a gold piece lies under his pillow.” She told her what
she was to do to get it, and what part she had to play, and finally
threatened her, and said with angry eyes, “And if you do not attend to
what I say, it will be the worse for you.”

Now when the huntsman came nearer he descried the maiden, and said to
himself, “I have traveled about for such a long time, I will take a
rest for once, and enter that beautiful castle. I have certainly money
enough.” Nevertheless, the real reason was that he had caught sight of
the pretty maiden.

He entered the house, and was well received and courteously
entertained. Before long, he was so much in love with the young Witch
that he no longer thought of anything else, and saw things as she saw
them, and did what she desired.

The Old Woman then said, “Now we must have the bird’s heart, he will
never miss it.” She prepared a drink, and when it was ready, poured
it into a cup and gave it to the maiden, who was to present it to the
huntsman.

She did so, saying, “Now, my Dearest, drink to me.”

So he took the cup, and when he had swallowed the draught, he brought
up the heart of the bird. The girl had to take it away secretly and
swallow it herself, for the Old Woman would have it so. Thenceforward
he found no more gold under his pillow. But it lay instead under that
of the maiden, from whence the Old Woman fetched it away every morning.
But he was so much in love and so befooled, that he thought of nothing
else but of passing his time with the maiden.

Then the old Witch said, “We have the bird’s heart, but we must also
take the Wishing-Cloak away from him.”

The maiden answered, “We will leave him that; he has lost his wealth.”

The Old Woman was angry and said, “Such a mantle is a wonderful thing,
and is seldom to be found in this world. I must and will have it!” She
gave the maiden several blows, and said that if she did not obey, it
should fare ill with her.

So she did the Old Woman’s bidding, placed herself at the window and
looked on the distant country, as if she were very sorrowful.

The huntsman asked, “Why do you stand there so sorrowfully?”

“Ah, my Beloved,” was her answer, “over yonder lies the Garnet
Mountain, where the precious stones grow. I long for them so much that
when I think of them, I feel quite sad, but who can get them? Only the
birds; they fly and can reach them, but a man never.”

“Have you nothing else to complain of?” said the huntsman. “I will soon
remove that burden from your heart.”

With that he drew her under his mantle, wished himself on the Garnet
Mountain. In the twinkling of an eye they were sitting on it together.
Precious stones were glistening on every side, so that it was a joy to
see them. Together they gathered the finest and costliest of them.

Now, the Old Woman had, through her sorceries, contrived that the eyes
of the huntsman should become heavy. He said to the maiden, “We will
sit down and rest a while. I am so tired, that I can no longer stand on
my feet.”

Then they sat down, and he laid his head in her lap, and fell asleep.
When he was asleep, she unfastened the mantle from his shoulders, and
wrapped herself in it, picked up the garnets and stones, and wished
herself back at home with them.

But when the huntsman had had his sleep out, he awoke, and perceived
that his sweetheart had betrayed him, and left him alone on the wild
mountain. Then he said, “Oh, what treachery there is in the world!” and
sat there in care and sorrow, not knowing what to do.

But the mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous Giants, who dwelt
thereon and lived their lives there, and he had not sat long, before he
saw three of them coming toward him. The Giants came up, and the first
kicked him with his foot and said, “What sort of an earthworm is lying
curled up here?”

The second said, “Step upon him and kill him.”

But the third said, “Would that be worth your while? Let him live, he
cannot remain here. When he climbs higher, toward the summit of the
mountain, the clouds will lay hold of him and bear him away.” So saying
they passed by.

But the Huntsman had paid heed to their words, and as soon as they
were gone, he rose and climbed up to the summit of the mountain.
And when he had sat there a while, a cloud floated toward him,
caught him up, carried him away, and traveled about for a long time
in the heavens. Then it sank lower, and let itself down on a great
cabbage-garden, girt round by walls, so that he came softly to the
ground on cabbages and vegetables.

Then the huntsman looked about him, and said, “If I only had something
to eat! I am so hungry, and my hunger will grow greater. But I see here
neither apples nor pears, nor any other sort of fruit, everywhere there
is nothing but cabbages.” At length he thought, “At a pinch I can eat
some of the leaves. They do not taste particularly good, but they will
refresh me.”

With that he picked himself out a fine head of cabbage, and ate it. But
scarcely had he swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, when wonderful! he
felt quite changed.

Four legs grew on him, a large head and two thick ears; and he saw with
horror that he was changed into a Donkey. Still as his hunger became
greater every minute, and as the juicy leaves were suitable to his
present nature, he went on eating with great zest. At last he arrived
at a different kind of cabbage, but as soon as he had swallowed it, he
again felt a change, and resumed his human shape.

Then the huntsman lay down, and slept off his fatigue. When he awoke
next morning, he broke off one head of the bad cabbages and another of
the good ones, and thought to himself, “This shall help me to get my
own again and punish treachery.”

Then he took the cabbages with him, climbed over the wall, and went
forth to seek for the castle of his sweetheart.

After wandering about for a couple of days, he was lucky enough to find
it again. He dyed his face brown, so that his own mother would not have
known him; and begged for shelter. “I am so tired,” said he, “that I
can go no further.”

The Witch asked, “Who are you, Countryman, and what is your business?”

Said he, “I have been so fortunate as to find the most wonderful salad
which grows under the sun, and am carrying it about with me.”

When the Old Woman heard of the exquisite salad, she was greedy, and
said, “Dear Countryman, let me just taste this wonderful salad.”

“Why not?” answered he, “I have brought two heads with me, and will
give you one of them,” and he opened his pouch and handed her the bad
cabbage.

The Witch suspected nothing amiss, and her mouth watered so for this
new dish, that she herself went into the kitchen and prepared it. When
it was ready she could not wait until it was set on the table, but took
a couple of leaves at once, and put them in her mouth. Hardly had she
swallowed them, than she was deprived of her human shape, and she ran
out into the courtyard in the form of a Donkey.

Presently the maid-servant entered the kitchen, saw the salad standing
there ready prepared, and was about to carry it up. But on the way,
according to habit, she was seized by the desire to taste, and she ate
a couple of leaves. Instantly the magic power showed itself, and she
likewise became a Donkey, and ran out to the Old Woman. And the dish
of salad fell to the ground.

Meantime the huntsman sat beside the beautiful maiden, and as no one
came with the salad and she also was longing for it, she said, “I don’t
know what has become of the salad.”

The huntsman thought, “The salad must have already taken effect,” and
said, “I will go to the kitchen and inquire about it.”

As he went down he saw the two Donkeys running about in the courtyard.
The salad, however, was lying on the ground. “All right,” said he, “the
two have taken their portion,” and he picked up the other leaves, laid
them on the dish, and carried them to the maiden. “I bring you the
delicate food myself,” said he, “in order that you may not have to wait
longer.”

Then she ate of it, and was, like the others, immediately deprived of
her human form, and ran out into the courtyard in the shape of a Donkey.

After the huntsman had washed his face, so that the transformed ones
could recognize him, he went down into the courtyard, and said,
“Now you shall receive the wages of your treachery,” and bound them
together, all three with one rope, and drove them along until he came
to a mill.

He knocked at the window, the miller put out his head, and asked what
he wanted. “I have three unmanageable beasts,” answered he, “which I
don’t want to keep any longer. Will you take them in, and give them
food and stable room, and manage them as I tell you? Then I will pay
you what you ask.”

The miller said, “Why not? But how am I to manage them?”

The huntsman then said that he was to give three beatings and one
meal daily to the old Donkey, and that was the Witch; one beating and
three meals to the younger one, which was the servant-girl; and to the
youngest, which was the maiden, no beatings and three meals, for he
could not bring himself to have the maiden beaten. After that he went
back into the castle, and found therein everything he needed.

After a couple of days, the miller came and said he must inform him
that the old Donkey which had received three beatings and only one
meal daily, was dead; “the two others,” he continued, “are certainly
not dead, and are fed three times daily, but they are so sad that they
cannot last much longer.”

The huntsman was moved to pity, put away his anger, and told the miller
to drive them back again to him. And when they came, he gave them some
of the good salad, so that they became human again.

The beautiful maiden fell on her knees before him, and said, “Ah, my
Beloved, forgive me for the evil I have done you. My mother drove
me to it. It was done against my will, for I love you dearly. Your
Wishing-Cloak hangs in a cupboard, and as for the Bird’s-Heart I will
take a potion and bring it up again.”

But he thought otherwise, and said, “Keep it. It is all the same, for I
will take you for my true wife.”

So the wedding was celebrated, and they lived happily together until
their death.




  

CLEVER HANS


I

The mother of Hans said, “Whither away, Hans?”

Hans answered, “To Grethel.”

“Behave well, Hans.”

“Oh, I’ll behave well. Good-bye, Mother.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans comes to Grethel. “Good day, Grethel.”

“Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is good?”

“I bring nothing, I want to have something given me.”

Grethel presents Hans with a needle.

Hans says, “Good-bye, Grethel.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows the cart
home. “Good evening, Mother.”

“Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?”

“With Grethel.”

“What did you take her?”

“Took nothing; had something given me.”

“What did Grethel give you?”

“Gave me a needle.”

“Where is the needle, Hans?”

“Stuck in the hay-cart.”

“That was ill done, Hans. You should have stuck the needle in your
sleeve.”

“Never mind, I’ll do better next time.”


II

“Whither away, Hans?”

“To Grethel, Mother.”

“Behave well, Hans.”

“Oh, I’ll behave well. Good-bye, Mother.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans comes to Grethel. “Good day, Grethel.”

“Good day, Hans. What do you bring that is good?”

“I bring nothing, I want to have something given me.”

Grethel presents Hans with a knife.

“Good-bye, Grethel.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, and goes home.

“Good evening, Mother.”

“Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?”

“With Grethel.”

“What did you take her?”

“Took her nothing, she gave me something.”

“What did Grethel give you?”

“Gave me a knife.”

“Where is the knife, Hans?”

“Stuck it in my sleeve.”

“That’s ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in your pocket.”

“Never mind, will do better next time.”


III

“Whither away, Hans?”

“To Grethel, Mother.”

“Behave well, Hans.”

“Oh, I’ll behave well. Good-bye, Mother.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans comes to Grethel. “Good day, Grethel.”

“Good day, Hans. What good thing do you bring?”

“I bring nothing. I want something given me.”

Grethel presents Hans with a young goat.

“Good-bye, Grethel.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans takes the goat, ties its legs, and puts it in his pocket. When he
gets home it is suffocated.

“Good evening, Mother.”

“Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?”

“With Grethel.”

“What did you take her?”

“Took nothing, she gave me something.”

“What did Grethel give you?”

“She gave me a goat.”

“Where is the goat, Hans?”

“Put it in my pocket.”

“That was ill done, Hans, you should have put a rope round the goat’s
neck.”

“Never mind, will do better next time.”


IV

“Whither away, Hans?”

“To Grethel, Mother.”

“Behave well, Hans.”

“Oh, I’ll behave well. Good-bye, Mother.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans comes to Grethel. “Good day, Grethel.”

“Good day, Hans. What good thing do you bring?”

“I bring nothing, I want something given me.”

Grethel presents Hans with a piece of bacon.

“Good-bye, Grethel.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it away behind him.
The dogs come and devour the bacon. When he gets home, he has the rope
in his hand, and there is no longer anything hanging to it.

“Good evening, Mother.”

“Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?”

“With Grethel.”

“What did you take her?”

“I took her nothing, she gave me something.”

“What did Grethel give you?”

“Gave me a bit of bacon.”

“Where is the bacon, Hans?”

“I tied it to a rope, brought it home, dogs took it.”

“That was ill done, Hans, you should have carried the bacon on your
head.”

“Never mind, will do better next time.”


V

“Whither away, Hans?”

“To Grethel, Mother.”

“Behave well, Hans.”

“I’ll behave well. Good-bye, Mother.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans comes to Grethel. “Good day, Grethel.”

“Good day, Hans. What good thing do you bring?”

“I bring nothing, but would have something given me.”

Grethel presents Hans with a calf.

“Good-bye, Grethel.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks his face.

“Good evening, Mother.”

“Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?”

“With Grethel.”

“What did you take her?”

“I took nothing, but had something given me.”

“What did Grethel give you?”

“A calf.”

“Where have you the calf, Hans?”

“I set it on my head and it kicked my face.”

“That was ill done, Hans, you should have led the calf, and put it in
the stall.”

“Never mind, will do better next time.”


VI

“Whither away, Hans?”

“To Grethel, Mother.”

“Behave well, Hans.”

“I’ll behave well. Good-bye, Mother.”

“Good-bye, Hans.”

Hans comes to Grethel. “Good day, Grethel.”

“Good day, Hans. What good thing do you bring?”

“I bring nothing, but would have something given me.”

Grethel says to Hans, “I will go with you.”

Hans takes Grethel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack, and
binds her fast. Then Hans goes to his mother.

“Good evening, Mother.”

“Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?”

“With Grethel.”

“What did you take her?”

“I took her nothing.”

“What did Grethel give you?”

“She gave me nothing, she came with me.”

“Where have you left Grethel?”

“I led her by the rope, tied her to the rack, and scattered some grass
for her.”

“That was ill done, Hans, you should have cast friendly eyes on her.”

“Never mind, will do better.”

Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves’ and sheep’s eyes,
and threw them in Grethel’s face. Then Grethel became angry, tore
herself lose and ran away, and became the Bride of Hans.




  

THE IRON STOVE


In the days when wishing was having, a King’s Son was enchanted by an
old Witch, and shut up in an Iron Stove in a forest. There he passed
many years, and no one could deliver him.

Then a King’s Daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself and
could not find her father’s kingdom again. After she had wandered about
for nine days, she at length came to the Iron Stove. Then a voice
issued from it, and asked her, “Whence come you, and whither go you?”

She answered, “I have lost my father’s kingdom, and cannot get home
again.”

Then a voice inside the Iron Stove said, “I will help you to get home,
and that indeed most swiftly, if you will promise to do what I desire
of you. I am the son of a far greater King than your father, and I will
marry you.”

Then was she afraid, and thought, “Alas! What use could I have with
an Iron Stove?” But as she much wished to get home to her father, she
promised to do as he desired.

He said, “You shall return here, and bring a knife with you, and scrape
a hole in the iron.”

Then he gave her a companion who walked near her, but did not speak.
In two hours he took her home. There was great joy in the castle when
the King’s Daughter came back, and the old King fell on her neck, and
kissed her.

She, however, was sorely troubled, and said, “Dear Father, what I
have suffered! I should never have got home again from the great wild
forest, if I had not come to an Iron Stove. But I have been forced to
give my word that I will go back to it, set it free, and marry it.”

Then the old King was so terrified that he all but fainted, for he had
only this one daughter. They, therefore, resolved they would send, in
her place, the miller’s daughter, who was very beautiful. They took her
there, gave her a knife, and said she was to scrape at the Iron Stove.
So she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, but could not bring off
the least morsel of it.

When day dawned, a voice in the stove said, “It seems to me it is day
outside.”

Then she answered, “It seems so to me too. I fancy I hear the noise of
my father’s mill.”

“So you are a miller’s daughter! Then go your way at once. Let the
King’s Daughter come here.”

She went away at once, and told the old King that the man outside there
would have none of her--he wanted the King’s Daughter.

They, however, still had a swineherd’s daughter, who was even prettier
than the miller’s daughter, and they determined to give her a piece
of gold to go to the Iron Stove, instead of the King’s Daughter. So
she was taken thither, and she also had to scrape for four-and-twenty
hours. She, likewise, made nothing of it.

When day broke, a voice inside the stove cried, “It seems to me it is
day outside!”

Then answered she, “So it seems to me. I fancy I hear my father’s horn
blowing.”

“Then you are a swineherd’s daughter! Go away at once. Tell the King’s
Daughter to come, and tell her all must be done as was promised. And
if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall be ruined, and
destroyed, and not one stone be left standing on another.”

When the King’s Daughter heard that, she began to weep. But now there
was nothing for it but to keep her promise. So she took leave of her
father, put a knife in her pocket, and went forth to the Iron Stove in
the forest.

When she got there, she began to scrape, and the iron gave way, and
when two hours were over, she had already scraped a small hole. Then
she peeped in, and saw a youth so handsome, and so brilliant with gold
and with precious jewels, that her very soul was delighted. Therefore,
she went on scraping, and made the hole so large that he was able to
get out.

Then said he, “You are mine, and I am yours. You are my Bride, and have
released me.”

He wanted to take her away with him to his kingdom, but she entreated
him to let her go once again to her father. The King’s Son allowed her
to do so, but she was not to say more to her father than three words,
and then she was to come back again.

So she went home, but she spoke more than three words, and instantly
the Iron Stove disappeared, and was taken far away over glass mountains
and piercing swords. But the King’s Son was set free, and no longer
shut up in it.

After this, she bade good-bye to her father, took some money with her,
but not much, and went back to the great forest, and looked for the
Iron Stove, but it was nowhere to be found. For nine days she sought
it. Then her hunger grew so great that she did not know what to do, for
she could no longer live.

When it was evening, she seated herself in a small tree, and made up
her mind to spend the night there, as she was afraid of wild beasts.
When midnight drew near, she saw in the distance a small light, and
thought, “Ah, there I may be saved!” She got down from the tree, and
went toward the light, and on the way she prayed. Then she came to a
little old house, and much grass had grown all about it, and a small
heap of wood lay in front of it.

She thought, “Ah, whither have I come!” and peeped in through the
window. But she saw nothing inside but Toads, big and little, except a
table covered with wine and roast meat, while the plates and glasses
were of silver. Then she took courage, and knocked at the door. The fat
Toad cried:

    “_Little green Waiting-Maid,
      Waiting-Maid with the limping leg,
      Little Dog of the limping leg,
      Hop hither and thither,
      And quickly see who is without!_”

and a small Toad came along and opened the door to her.


When she entered, they all bade her welcome, and she was forced to
sit down. They asked, “Where have you come from, and whither are you
going?”

Then she related all that had befallen her, and how because she had
disobeyed the order which had been given her not to say more than three
words, the stove, and the King’s Son also, had disappeared, and now she
was seeking him over hill and dale until she found him. At that, the
old fat one said:

    “_Little green Waiting-Maid,
      Waiting-Maid with the limping leg,
      Little Dog of the limping leg,
      Hop hither and thither,
      And bring me the great box._”

Then the little one went and brought the box. After this they gave her
meat and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which felt like silk
and velvet. She laid herself therein, in God’s name, and slept.

When morning came she arose, and the old Toad gave her three needles
out of the great box, which she was to take with her; they would be
needed by her, for she had to cross a high Glass Mountain, and go
over three piercing swords and a great lake. If she did all this, she
would get her lover back again. Then she gave her three things, which
she was to take the greatest care of, namely, three large needles, a
plough-wheel, and three nuts.

With these she traveled onwards, and when she came to the Glass
Mountain, which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles first
behind her feet and then before them, and so got over it. And when
she was over it, she hid them in a place which she marked carefully.
After this she came to the three piercing swords, and then she seated
herself on her plough-wheel, and rolled over them. At last she arrived
in front of a great lake, and when she had crossed it, she came to a
large and beautiful castle.

She went in and asked for a place. She knew, however, that the King’s
Son whom she had released from the Iron Stove in the great forest, was
in the castle. Then she was taken as a scullery-maid at low wages. But,
already the King’s Son had another maiden by his side, whom he wanted
to marry, for he thought that she had long been dead.

In the evening, when she had washed up and was done, she felt in her
pocket and found the three nuts which the old Toad had given her. She
cracked one with her teeth, and was going to eat the kernel, when, lo
and behold, there was a stately royal garment in it! But when the Bride
heard of this she came and asked for the dress, and wanted to buy it,
and said, “It is not a dress for a servant-girl.”

She said, no, she would not sell it, but if the Bride would grant her
one thing she should have it, and that was, leave to sleep one night
in her Bridegroom’s chamber. The Bride gave her permission because the
dress was so pretty, and she had never had one like it.

When it was evening, she said to her Bridegroom, “That silly girl will
sleep in your room.”

“If you are willing so am I,” said he.

She, however, gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured a
sleeping-draught. So the Bridegroom and the scullery-maid went to sleep
in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not waken him.

She wept the whole night and cried, “I set you free when you were in an
Iron Stove in the wild forest. I sought you, and walked over a Glass
Mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great lake before I found you,
and yet you will not hear me!”

The servants sat by the chamber-door, and heard how she thus wept the
whole night through, and in the morning they told it to their lord.

And the next evening, when she had washed up, she opened the second
nut, and a far more beautiful dress was within it. When the Bride
beheld it, she wished to buy that also. But the girl would not take
money, and begged that she might once again sleep in the Bridegroom’s
chamber. The Bride, however, gave him a sleeping-drink, and he slept so
soundly that he could hear nothing.

But the scullery-maid wept the whole night long, and cried, “I set you
free when you were in an Iron Stove in the wild forest. I sought you,
and walked over a Glass Mountain, and over three sharp swords and a
great lake before I found you, and yet you will not hear me!”

The servants sat by the chamber-door and heard her weeping the whole
night through, and in the morning informed their lord of it.

And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened the third
nut, and within it was a still more beautiful dress which was stiff
with pure gold.

When the Bride saw that, she wanted to have it, but the maiden gave it
up only on condition that she might for the third time sleep in the
Bridegroom’s apartment. The King’s Son was, However, on his guard, and
threw the sleeping-draught away.

Now, therefore, when she began to weep and to cry, “Dearest Love, I set
you free when you were in the Iron Stove in the terrible wild forest,”
the King’s Son leapt up and said, “You are the true one, you are mine,
and I am yours.”

Thereupon, while it was still night, he got into a carriage with her,
and they took away the false Bride’s clothes so that she could not get
up. When they came to the great lake, they sailed across it, and when
they reached the three sharp-cutting swords they seated themselves on
the plough-wheel, and when they got to the Glass Mountain they thrust
the three needles in it. And so at length they reached the little old
house. But when they went inside that, it was a great castle, and the
Toads were all disenchanted, and were King’s children, and full of
happiness.

Then the wedding was celebrated, and the King’s Son and the Princess
remained in the castle, which was much larger than the castles of their
fathers. But, as the old King grieved at being left alone, they fetched
him away, and brought him to live with them. And they had two Kingdoms,
and lived together happily ever afterward.

      _A Mouse did run,_
      _The story’s done!_




  

SWEET PORRIDGE


There was a poor, good little girl, who lived alone with her mother,
and they had nothing more to eat.

So the child went into the forest, and an Old Woman met her, who knew
of her sorrow, and gave her a Little Pot, which, when she said:

    “_Boil, Little Pot, boil!_”

would cook good sweet Porridge. And when she said:

    “_Stop, Little Pot, stop!_”

it ceased to cook.

The little girl took the Pot home to her mother. And now they were
freed from their poverty and hunger, and ate sweet Porridge as often as
they liked.

Once on a time, when the little girl had gone out, the mother said:

    “_Boil, Little Pot, boil!_”

And it began to cook, and she ate till she was satisfied. Then she
wanted the Pot to stop cooking, but did not know the word.

So it went on cooking, and the Porridge rose over the edge. And still
it cooked on till the kitchen, and the whole house was full, and then
the next house, and then the whole street, just as if it wanted to
satisfy the hunger of the whole world. And there was the greatest
trouble, and no one knew how to stop it. At last, when only a single
house was left, the child came home and just said:

    “_Stop, Little Pot, stop!_”

and it stopped cooking.

And whosoever wished to return to the town, had to eat his way back.




  

SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED


There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which
bore white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like
the two rose-trees. One was called Snow-White, and the other Rose-Red.

They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-White was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-Red. Rose-Red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies. But Snow-White sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with the housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of each other, that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together. When Snow-White said,
“We will not leave each other,” Rose-Red answered, “Never so long as we
live.” And their mother would add, “What one has, she must share with
the other.”

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries. Beasts
never did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leapt merrily by them, and the birds sat still
upon the boughs, and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them. If they stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near one another upon the
moss, and slept until morning. Their mother knew this, and had no worry
on their account.

One day, when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had
roused them, they saw a beautiful Child in a shining white dress
sitting near their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but
said nothing and went away into the forest. And when they looked round,
they found that they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and
would certainly have fallen into it in the darkness, if they had gone
only a few paces farther. And their mother told them that it must have
been the Angel who watches over good children.

Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their mother’s little cottage so neat,
that it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer, Rose-Red took
care of the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her
mother’s bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In
the winter, Snow-White lit the fire and hung the kettle on the hook.
The kettle was of copper and shone like gold, so brightly was it
polished.

In the evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said, “Go,
Snow-White, and bolt the door,” and then they sat round the hearth, and
the mother took her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book. The
two girls listened as they sat and span. And close by them lay a lamb
upon the floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its
head hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, some one
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said,
“Quick, Rose-Red, open the door, it must be a traveler who is seeking
shelter.”

Rose-Red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a poor
man, but it was not. It was a Bear that stretched his broad, black head
within the door.

Rose-Red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove
fluttered, and Snow-White hid herself behind her mother’s bed.

But the Bear began to speak and said, “Do not be afraid. I will do you
no harm! I am half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside
you.”

“Poor Bear,” said the mother, “lie down by the fire. Only take care
that you do not burn your coat.” Then she cried, “Snow-White, Rose-Red,
come out, the Bear will do you no harm, he means well.”

So they both came out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and
were not afraid of him.

The Bear said, “Here, Children, knock the snow out of my coat a
little;” so they brought the broom and swept the Bear’s hide clean.
And he stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and
comfortably.

It was not long before they grew quite at home, and played tricks with
their clumsy guest. They tugged at his hair with their hands, put their
feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a hazel-switch
and beat him, and, when he growled, they laughed. But the Bear took it
all in good part, only when they were too rough he called out, “Leave
me alive, Children:

    “_Snowy-white, Rosy-red,_
      _Will you beat your lover dead?_”

When it was bedtime, and the others went to sleep, the mother said to
the Bear, “You may lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe
from the cold and the bad weather.”

As soon as day dawned the two children let him out, and he trotted
across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the Bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked. They got so used to him, that the doors were never
fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring was come and all outside was green, the Bear said one
morning to Snow-White, “Now I must go away, and cannot come back for
the whole summer.”

“Where are you going, then, dear Bear?” asked Snow-White.

“I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
Dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through. But now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal. And what once gets into their hands and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again.”

Snow-White was very sorry for his going away. And as she unbolted the
door for him, and the Bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off. It seemed to Snow-White as
if she saw gold shining through it, but she was not sure about it. The
Bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the trees.

A short time afterward, the mother sent her children into the forest
to get fire-wood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backward and
forward in the grass. But they could not make out what it was.

When they came nearer they saw a Dwarf with an old withered face and
a snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping backward and
forward like a dog tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, “Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?”

“What are you about there, Little Man?” asked Rose-Red.

“You stupid, prying goose!” answered the Dwarf; “I was going to split
the tree to get a little wood for cooking. The little bit of food that
one of us wants gets burnt up directly with thick logs. We do not
swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had just driven the wedge
safely in, and everything was going as I wished; but the wretched wood
was too smooth and suddenly sprang asunder, and the tree closed so
quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white beard. So now it
is tight in, and I cannot get away. And you silly, sleek, milk-faced
things laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!”

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast.

“I will run and fetch some one,” said Rose-Red.

“You senseless goose!” snarled the Dwarf. “Why should you fetch
some one? You are already two too many for me. Can you not think of
something better?”

“Don’t be impatient,” said Snow-White, “I will help you,” and she
pulled her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the Dwarf felt himself free, he grabbed a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted
it up, grumbling to himself, “Rude people, to cut off a piece of my
fine beard! Bad luck to you!” and then he swung the bag upon his back,
and went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time after that Snow-White and Rose-Red went to catch a dish of
fish. As they came near the brook, they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping toward the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the Dwarf.

“Where are you going?” said Rose-Red; “you surely don’t want to go into
the water?”


“I am not such a fool!” cried the Dwarf; “don’t you see that the
accursed fish wants to pull me in?” The Little Man had been sitting
there fishing, and unluckily the wind had twisted his beard with the
fishing-line. Just then a big fish bit, and the feeble creature had not
strength to pull it out. The fish kept the upper hand and was pulling
the Dwarf toward him. He held on to all the reeds and rushes, but it
was of little good, he was forced to follow the fish, and was in
great danger of being dragged into the water.

The girls came just in time. They held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line. But all in vain, beard and line were entangled
fast together. Nothing was left but to bring out the scissors and cut
the beard, whereby a small part of it was lost.

When the Dwarf saw that, he screamed out, “Is that civil, you
toadstool, to disfigure one’s face? Was it not enough to clip off the
end of my beard? Now you have cut off the best part of it. I cannot
let myself be seen by my people. I wish you had been made to run the
soles off your shoes!” Then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in
the rushes, and, without saying a word more, he dragged it away and
disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterward the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led
them across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn about.
They now noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round
and round above them. It sank lower and lower, and at last settled near
a rock not far off. Directly afterward they heard a loud, piteous cry.
They ran up and saw, with horror, that the eagle had seized their old
acquaintance the Dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the Little Man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.

As soon as the Dwarf had recovered from his first fright, he cried
with his shrill voice, “Could you not have done it more carefully! You
dragged at my brown coat, so that it is all torn and full of holes. You
helpless, clumsy creatures!” Then he took up a sack full of precious
stones, and slipped away again under the rock into his hole.

The girls, who by this time were used to his thanklessness, went on
their way and did their business in the town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
Dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that any one would come there at such a late hour.
The evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones. They glittered and
sparkled with all colors so beautifully, that the children stood still
and looked at them.

“Why do you stand gaping there?” cried the Dwarf, and his ashen-gray
face became copper-red with rage. He was going on with his bad words,
when a loud growling was heard, and a black Bear came trotting toward
them out of the forest. The Dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he could
not get to his cave, for the Bear was already close.

Then in the fear of his heart he cried, “Dear Mr. Bear, spare me! I
will give you all my treasures! Look, the beautiful jewels lying there!
Grant me my life. What do you want with such a slender little fellow
as I? You would not feel me between your teeth. Come, take these two
wicked girls, they are tender morsels for you, fat as young quails. For
mercy’s sake eat them!”

The Bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature a
single blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the Bear called to them, “Snow-White and
Rose-Red, do not be afraid. Wait, I will come with you.”

Then they knew his voice and waited. And when he came up to them,
suddenly his bear-skin fell off, and he stood there a handsome man,
clothed all in gold.

“I am a King’s Son,” he said, “and I was bewitched by that wicked
Dwarf, who had stolen my treasures. I have had to run about the forest
as a savage bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his
well-deserved punishment.”

Snow-White was married to him, and Rose-Red to his brother. They
divided between them the great treasure which the Dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.




  

THE HEDGE-KING


In former days, every sound had its meaning, the birds also had their
own language which every one understood. Now it only sounds like
chirping, screeching, and whistling, and to some, like music without
words.

It came into the birds’ mind, however, that they would no longer be
without a ruler, and would choose one of themselves to be King.

One alone amongst them, the green plover, was opposed to this. He had
lived free and would die free, and anxiously flying hither and thither,
he cried, “Where shall I go? where shall I go?” He retired into a
lonely and unfrequented marsh, and showed himself no more among his
fellows.

The birds now wished to discuss the matter, and on a fine May morning
they all gathered together from the woods and fields: eagles and
chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, how can I name them
all? Even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, his clerk, who is so called
because he is always heard a few days before him, and a very small bird
which as yet had no name, mingled with the band.

The hen, which by some accident had heard nothing of the whole matter,
was astonished at the great assemblage. “What, what, what is going to
be done?” she cackled. But the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said,
“Only rich people,” and told her what they had on hand.

It was decided, however, that the one who could fly the highest should
be King. A tree-frog which was sitting among the bushes, when he heard
that, cried a warning, “No, no, no! no!” because he thought that many
tears would be shed because of this. But the crow said, “Caw, caw,” and
that all would pass off peaceably.

It was now determined that, on this fine morning, they should at once
begin to ascend, so that hereafter no one should be able to say, “I
could easily have flown much higher, but the evening came on, and I
could do no more.”

On a given signal, therefore, the whole troop rose up in the air. The
dust ascended from the land, and there was tremendous fluttering and
whirring and beating of wings. It looked as if a black cloud was rising
up. The little birds were, however, soon left behind. They could go no
farther, and fell back to the ground.

The larger birds held out longer, but none could equal the eagle, who
mounted so high that he could have picked the eyes out of the sun. And
when he saw that the others could not get up to him, he thought, “Why
should I fly any higher, I am the King?” and began to let himself down
again.

The birds beneath him at once cried to him, “You must be our King, no
one has flown so high as you.”

“Except me,” screamed the little fellow without a name, who had crept
into the breast-feathers of the eagle. And as he was not at all tired,
he rose up and mounted so high that he reached heaven itself. When,
however, he had gone as far as this, he folded his wings together, and
called down with clear and penetrating voice:

   “_I am King! I am King!_”

“You, our King?” cried the birds angrily. “You have done this by trick
and cunning!”

So they made another condition. He should be King who could go down
lowest in the ground. How the goose did flap about with its broad
breast when it was once more on the land! How quickly the cock
scratched a hole! The duck came off the worst of all, for she leapt
into a ditch, but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a neighboring
pond, crying, “Cheating, cheating!”

The little bird without a name, however, sought out a mouse-hole,
slipped down into it, and cried out of it, with his small voice:

   “_I am King! I am King!_”

“You our King!” cried the birds still more angrily. “Do you think your
cunning shall prevail?”

They determined to keep him a prisoner in the hole and starve him out.
The owl was placed as sentinel in front of it, and was not to let the
rascal out if she had any value for her life. When evening was come all
the birds were feeling very tired after exerting their wings so much
that they went to bed with their wives and children.

The owl alone remained standing by the mouse-hole, gazing steadfastly
into it with her great eyes. In the meantime she, too, had grown tired
and thought to herself, “You might certainly shut one eye, you will
still watch with the other, and the little miscreant shall not come out
of his hole.” So she shut one eye, and with the other looked straight
at the mouse-hole.

The little fellow put his head out and peeped, and wanted to slip away,
but the owl came forward, and he drew his head back. Then the owl
opened the one eye again, and shut the other, intending to shut them in
turn all through the night.

But when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to open the other. And
as soon as both her eyes were shut, she fell asleep. The little fellow
soon saw that, and slipped away.

From that day forth, the owl has never dared to show herself by
daylight, for if she does the other birds chase her and pluck her
feathers out. She only flies out by night, but hates and pursues mice
because they make such ugly holes.

The little bird, too, is very unwilling to let himself be seen, because
he is afraid it will cost him his life if he is caught. He steals
about in the hedges, and when he is quite safe, he sometimes cries, “I
am King,” and for this reason, the other birds call him in mockery,
“Hedge-King.”

No one, however, was so happy as the lark at not having to obey the
little King. As soon as the sun appears, she ascends high in the air
and cries, “Ah, how beautiful that is! beautiful that is! beautiful,
beautiful! ah, how beautiful that is!”




  

ONE-EYE, TWO-EYES, AND THREE-EYES


There was once a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whom
was called One-Eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead, and the second, Two-Eyes, because she had two eyes like other
folks, and the youngest, Three-Eyes, because she had three eyes; and
her third eye was in the centre of her forehead.

Now, as Two-Eyes saw just as other human beings did, her sisters and
her mother could not endure her. They said to her, “You, with your two
eyes, are no better than common folk. You do not belong to us!”

They pushed her about, and threw old clothes to her, and gave her
nothing to eat but what they left, and did everything that they could
to make her unhappy.

It came to pass that Two-Eyes had to go out into the fields and tend
the goat, but she was still very hungry, because her sisters had given
her so little to eat. She sat down on a ridge and began to weep, and so
bitterly that two streams ran down from her eyes.

And one day, when she looked up in her grief, a woman was standing
beside her, who said, “Why are you weeping, little Two-Eyes?”

Two-Eyes answered, “Have I not reason to weep, when I have two eyes
like other people, and my sisters and mother hate me for it, and push
me from one corner to another, throw old clothes at me, and give me
nothing to eat but the scraps they leave? To-day, they have given me so
little that I am still very hungry.”

Then the Wise Woman said, “Wipe away your tears, Two-Eyes, and I will
tell you something to stop your ever suffering from hunger again; just
say to your goat:

   “‘_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, bleat,
      Cover the table with something to eat!_’

and then a clean well-spread little table will stand before you, with
the most delicious food upon it, of which you may eat as much as you
are inclined. And when you have had enough, and have no more need of
the little table, just say:

   “‘_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, I pray,
      And take the table quite away!_’

and then it will vanish again from your sight.”

Hereupon the Wise Woman departed.

But Two-Eyes thought, “I must instantly make a trial, and see if what
she said is true, for I am far too hungry,” and she said:

    “_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, bleat,
      Cover the table with something to eat!_”

and scarcely had she spoken the words than a little table, covered with
a white cloth, was standing there, and on it was a plate with a knife
and fork, and a silver spoon; and the most delicious food was there
also, warm and smoking as if it had just come out of the kitchen.

Then Two-Eyes said a little prayer she knew, “Lord God, be with us
always, Amen,” and helped herself to some food, and enjoyed it. And
when she was satisfied, she said, as the Wise Woman had taught her:

    “_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, I pray,
      And take the table quite away!_”

and immediately the little table and everything on it was gone again.

“That is a delightful way of keeping house!” thought Two-Eyes, and was
quite glad and happy.

In the evening, when she went home with her goat, she found a small
earthenware dish with some food, which her sisters had set ready for
her, but she did not touch it. Next day, she again went out with her
goat, and left the few bits of broken bread which had been handed to
her, lying untouched.

The first and second time that she did this, her sisters did not notice
it, but as it happened every time, they did observe it, and said,
“There is something wrong about Two-Eyes, she always leaves her food
untasted. She used to eat up everything that was given her. She must
have discovered other ways of getting food.”

In order that they might learn the truth, they resolved to send One-Eye
with Two-Eyes, when she went to drive her goat to the pasture, to watch
what Two-Eyes did while she was there, and whether any one brought
her things to eat and drink. So when Two-Eyes set out the next time,
One-Eye went to her and said, “I will go with you to the pasture, and
see that the goat is well taken care of, and driven where there is
food.”

But Two-Eyes knew what was in One-Eye’s mind, and drove the goat into
high grass and said, “Come, One-Eye, we will sit down, and I will sing
something to you.”

One-Eye sat down, and was tired with the unaccustomed walk and the heat
of the sun, and Two-Eyes sang constantly:

    “_One-Eye, wakest thou?
      One-Eye, sleepest thou?_”

until One-Eye shut her one eye, and fell asleep. As soon as Two-Eyes
saw that One-Eye was fast asleep, and could discover nothing, she said:

    “_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, bleat,
      Cover the table with something to eat!_”

and seated herself at her table, and ate and drank until she was
satisfied. Then she again cried:

    “_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, I pray,
      And take the table quite away!_”

and in an instant all was gone.

Two-Eyes now awakened One-Eye, and said, “One-Eye, you want to take
care of the goat, and yet go to sleep while you are doing it! In the
meantime, the goat might run all over the world. Come, let us go home
again.”

So they went home, and again Two-Eyes let her little dish stand
untouched, and One-Eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat
it, and to excuse herself said, “I fell asleep when I was out.”

Next day, the mother said to Three-Eyes, “This time you shall go and
watch if Two-Eyes eats anything when she is out, and if any one fetches
her food and drink, for she must eat and drink in secret.”

So Three-Eyes went to Two-Eyes, and said, “I will go with you and see
if the goat is taken proper care of, and driven where there is food.”

But Two-Eyes knew what was in Three-Eyes’ mind, and drove the goat into
high grass and said, “We will sit down, and I will sing something to
you, Three-Eyes.”

Three-Eyes sat down and was tired with the walk and with the heat of
the sun, and Two-Eyes began the same song as before, and sang:

     “_Three-Eyes, are you waking?_”

but then, instead of singing,

     “_Three-Eyes, are you sleeping?_”

as she ought to have done, she thoughtlessly sang:

     “_Two-Eyes, are you sleeping?_”

and sang all the time,

    “_Three-Eyes, are you waking?
      Two-Eyes, are you sleeping?_”

Then two of the eyes which Three-Eyes had, shut and fell asleep, but
the third, as it had not been named in the song, did not sleep. It is
true that Three-Eyes shut it, but only in her cunning, to pretend it
was asleep too. But it blinked, and could see everything very well. And
when Two-Eyes thought that Three-eyes was fast asleep, she used her
little charm:

    “_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, bleat,
      Cover the table with something to eat!_”

and ate and drank as much as her heart desired, and then ordered the
table to go away again:

    “_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, I pray,
      And take the table quite away!_”

and Three-Eyes had seen everything.

Then Two-Eyes came to her, waked her and said, “Have you been asleep,
Three-Eyes? You are a good caretaker! Come, we will go home.”

And when they got home, Two-Eyes again did not eat, and Three-Eyes said
to the mother, “Now, I know why that proud thing there does not eat.
When she is out, she says to the goat:

   “‘_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, bleat,
      Cover the table with something to eat!_’

and then a little table appears before her covered with the best of
food, much better than any we have here. When she has eaten all she
wants, she says:

   “‘_Bleat, bleat, my little Goat, I pray,
      And take the table quite away!_’

and all disappears. I watched everything closely. She put two of my
eyes to sleep by using a charm, but luckily the one in my forehead kept
awake.”

Then the envious mother cried, “Do you want to fare better than we do?
The desire shall pass away!” and she fetched a butcher’s knife, and
thrust it into the heart of the goat, which fell down dead.

When Two-Eyes saw that, full of sorrow, she went outside, and seated
herself on the ridge of grass at the edge of the field, and wept bitter
tears.

Suddenly the Wise Woman once more stood by her side, and said,
“Two-Eyes, why are you weeping?”

“Have I not reason to weep?” she answered. “The goat, which covered the
table for me every day when I spoke your charm, has been killed by my
mother, and now I shall again have to bear hunger and want.”

The Wise Woman said, “Two-Eyes, I will give you a piece of good advice.
Ask your sisters to give you the entrails of the slaughtered goat, and
bury them in the ground in front of the house, and your fortune will be
made.”

Then she vanished, and Two-Eyes went home and said to her sisters,
“Dear Sisters, do give me some part of my goat. I don’t wish for what
is good, but give me the entrails.”

Then they laughed and said, “If that’s all you want, you may have it.”

So Two-Eyes took the entrails and buried them quietly, at evening, in
front of the house-door, as the Wise Woman had counseled her to do.

Next morning, when they all awoke, and went to the house-door, there
stood a wonderful, magnificent tree with leaves of silver, and fruit
of gold hanging among them, so that in all the wide world there was
nothing more beautiful or precious. They did not know how the tree
could have come there during the night, but Two-Eyes saw that it had
grown up out of the entrails of the goat, for it was standing on the
exact spot where she had buried them.

Then the mother said to One-Eye, “Climb up, my Child, and gather some
of the fruit of the tree for us.”

One-Eye climbed up, but when she was about to lay hold of one of the
golden apples, the branch escaped from her hands. And that happened
each time, so that she could not pluck a single apple, let her do what
she might.

Then said the mother, “Three-Eyes, do you climb up. You with your three
eyes can look about you better than One-Eye.”

One-Eye slipped down, and Three-Eyes climbed up. Three-Eyes was not
more skillful, and might search as she liked, but the golden apples
always escaped her.

At length, the mother grew impatient, and climbed up herself, but could
grasp the fruit no better than One-Eye and Three-Eyes, for she always
clutched empty air.

Then said Two-Eyes, “I will go up, perhaps I may succeed better.”

The sisters cried, “You, indeed, with your two eyes! What can you do?”

But Two-Eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did not get out of her
way, but came into her hand of their own accord, so that she could
pluck them one after the other. And she brought a whole apronful down
with her. The mother took them away from her, and instead of treating
poor Two-Eyes any better for this, she and One-Eye and Three-Eyes were
only envious, because Two-Eyes alone had been able to get the fruit.
They treated her still more cruelly.

It so befell that once, when they were all standing together by the
tree, a young Knight came up. “Quick, Two-Eyes,” cried the two sisters,
“creep under this and don’t disgrace us!” and with all speed they
turned an empty barrel, which was standing close by the tree, over
poor Two-Eyes, and they pushed the golden apples which she had been
gathering, under it too.

When the Knight came nearer he was a handsome lord, who stopped and
admired the magnificent gold and silver tree, and said to the two
sisters, “To whom does this fine tree belong? Any one who will bestow
one branch of it on me may, in return for it, ask whatsoever he
desires.”

Then One-Eye and Three-Eyes replied that the tree belonged to them, and
that they would give him a branch. They both tried very hard, but they
were not able to do it, for every time the branches and fruit moved
away from them.

Then said the Knight, “It is very strange that the tree should belong
to you, and yet you should still not be able to break a piece off.”

They again insisted that the tree was their property. Whilst they were
saying so, Two-Eyes rolled a couple of golden apples from under the
barrel to the feet of the Knight, for she was vexed with One-Eye and
Three-Eyes, for not speaking the truth.

When the Knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked from whence
they came. One-Eye and Three-Eyes answered that they had another
sister, who was not allowed to show herself, for she had only two eyes
like any common person.

The Knight, however, desired to see her, and cried, “Two-Eyes, come
hither!”

Then Two-Eyes, quite cheered, came from beneath the barrel, and the
Knight was surprised at her great beauty, and said, “You, Two-Eyes, can
certainly break off a branch from the tree for me.”

“Yes,” replied Two-Eyes, “that I certainly shall be able to do, for the
tree belongs to me.” And she climbed up, and with the greatest ease
broke off a branch with beautiful silver leaves and golden fruit, and
gave it to the Knight.

Then said the Knight, “Two-Eyes, what shall I give you for it?”

“Alas!” answered Two-Eyes, “I suffer from hunger and thirst, grief and
want, from early morning till late night. If you would take me with
you, and deliver me from these things, I should be happy.”

So the Knight lifted Two-Eyes on his horse, and took her home with
him to his father’s castle. There he gave her beautiful clothes and
meat and drink to her heart’s content. And as he loved her so much he
married her, and the wedding was solemnized with great rejoicing.

When Two-Eyes was thus carried away by the handsome Knight, her two
sisters grudged her good fortune in downright earnest. “The wonderful
tree, however, remains with us,” thought they, “and even if we can
gather no fruit from it, every one will stand still and look at it, and
come to us and admire it. Who knows what good things may be in store
for us?”

But next morning, the tree had vanished, and all their hopes were at
an end. And when Two-Eyes looked out of the window of her own little
room, to her great delight it was standing in front of it. And so it
had followed her.

Two-Eyes lived a long time in happiness. One day, two poor women came
to her castle, and begged for alms. She looked in their faces, and
recognized her sisters, One-Eye, and Three-Eyes, who had fallen into
such poverty that they had to wander about and beg their bread from
door to door. Two-Eyes made them welcome, and was kind to them, and
took care of them, so that they both, with all their hearts, repented
of the evil that they had done in their youth to their sister.




  

THE GOOSE-GIRL AT THE WELL


_The Old Witch_

There was once upon a time, a very old woman, who lived with her flock
of geese in a waste place among the mountains, and there had a little
house. The waste was surrounded by a large forest, and every morning
the Old Woman took her crutch and hobbled into it.

There, however, the dame was quite active, more so than any one would
have thought, considering her age, and collected grass for her geese,
picked all the wild fruit she could reach, and carried everything home
on her back. Any one would have thought that the heavy load would have
weighed her to the ground, but she always brought it safely home.

If any one met her, she greeted him quite courteously. “Good day, dear
Countryman, it is a fine day. Ah! you wonder that I should drag grass
about, but every one must take his burthen on his back.”

Nevertheless, people did not like to meet her if they could help it,
and took by preference a roundabout way. And when a father with his
boys passed her, he whispered to them, “Beware of the Old Woman. She
has claws beneath her gloves. She is a Witch.”

One morning, a handsome young man was going through the forest. The sun
shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze crept through the leaves,
and he was full of joy and gladness. He had as yet met no one, when he
suddenly perceived the old Witch kneeling on the ground cutting grass
with a sickle. She had already thrust a whole load into her cloth, and
near it stood two baskets, which were filled with wild apples and pears.

“But, good little Mother,” said he, “how can you carry all that away?”

“I must carry it, dear Sir,” answered she; “rich folk’s children have
no need to do such things, but with the peasant folk the saying goes,
‘Don’t look behind you, you will only see how crooked your back is!’

“Will you help me?” she said, as he remained standing by her. “You have
still a straight back and young legs, it would be a trifle to you.
Besides, my house is not so very far from here. It stands there on the
heath behind the hill. How soon you would bound up thither!”

The young man took compassion on the Old Woman. “My father is certainly
no peasant,” replied he, “but a rich Count. Nevertheless, that you may
see it is not only peasants who can carry things, I will take your
bundle.”

“If you will try it,” said she, “I shall be very glad. You will
certainly have to walk for an hour, but what will that signify to you?
Only you must carry the apples and pears as well.”

It now seemed to the young man just a little serious, when he heard
of an hour’s walk, but the Old Woman would not let him off, packed the
bundle on his back, and hung the two baskets on his arm. “See, it is
quite light,” said she.

“No, it is not light,” answered the Count, and pulled a rueful
face. “Verily, the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full of
cobblestones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead! I can
scarcely breathe.”

He had a mind to put everything down again, but the Old Woman would
not allow it. “Just look,” said she mockingly, “the young gentleman
will not carry what I, an old woman, have so often dragged along! You
are ready with fine words, but when it comes to being in earnest, you
want to take to your heels. Why are you standing loitering there?” she
continued. “Step out. No one will take the bundle off again.”

As long as he walked on level ground, it was still bearable, but when
they came to the hill and had to climb, and the stones rolled down
under his feet as if they were alive, it was beyond his strength. The
drops of perspiration stood on his forehead, and ran, hot and cold,
down his back.

“Dame,” said he, “I can go no farther. I want to rest a little.”

“Not here,” answered the Old Woman, “when we have arrived at our
journey’s end, you can rest. But now you must go forward. Who knows
what good it may do you?”

“Old woman, you are shameless!” said the Count, and tried to throw off
the bundle, but he labored in vain. It stuck as fast to his back, as if
it grew there. He turned and twisted, but he could not get rid of it.

The Old Woman laughed at this, and sprang about quite delighted on her
crutch. “Don’t get angry, dear Sir,” said she, “you are growing as red
in the face as a turkey-cock! Carry your bundle patiently. I will give
you a good present when we get home.”

What could he do? He was obliged to submit to his fate, and crawl
along patiently behind the Old Woman. She seemed to grow more and more
nimble, and his burden still heavier. All at once, she made a spring,
jumped on to the bundle and seated herself on the top of it. And
however withered she might be, she was yet heavier than the stoutest
country lass.

The youth’s knees trembled, but when he did not go on, the Old Woman
hit him about the legs with a switch and with stinging-nettles.
Groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at length reached
the Old Woman’s house, when he was just about to drop.

When the geese perceived the Old Woman, they flapped their wings,
stretched out their necks, ran to meet her, cackling all the while.
Behind the flock walked, stick in hand, an old wench, strong and big,
but ugly as night. “Good Mother,” said she to the Old Woman, “has
anything happened to you, you have stayed away so long?”

“By no means, my dear Daughter,” answered she, “I have met with nothing
bad, but, on the contrary, with this kind gentleman, who has carried
my burthen for me. Only think, he even took me on his back when I was
tired. The way, too, has not seemed long to us. We have been merry, and
have been cracking jokes with each other all the time.”

At last the Old Woman slid down, took the bundle off the young man’s
back, and the baskets from his arm, looked at him quite kindly, and
said, “Now seat yourself on the bench before the door, and rest. You
have fairly earned your wages, and they shall not be wanting.”

Then she said to the goose-girl, “Go into the house, my little
Daughter, it is not becoming for you to be alone with a young
gentleman. One must not pour oil on to the fire, he might fall in love
with you.”

The Count knew not whether to laugh or to cry. “Such a sweetheart as
that,” thought he, “could not touch my heart, even if she were thirty
years younger.”

In the meantime, the Old Woman stroked and fondled her geese as if they
were children, and then went into the house with her daughter. The
youth lay down on the bench, under a wild apple-tree. The air was warm
and mild. On all sides stretched a green meadow, which was set with
cowslips, wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers. Through the midst
of it rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled, and the white
geese went walking backward and forward, or paddled in the water.

“It is quite delightful here,” said he, “but I am so tired that I
cannot keep my eyes open. I will sleep a little. If only a gust of wind
does not come and blow my legs off my body, for they are as brittle as
tinder.”

When he had slept a little while, the Old Woman came and shook him till
he awoke. “Sit up,” said she, “you cannot stay here. I have certainly
treated you badly, still it has not cost you your life. Of money and
land you have no need, here is something else for you.”

Thereupon she thrust a little book into his hand, which was cut out of
a single emerald. “Take great care of it,” said she, “it will bring you
good fortune.”

The Count sprang up, and as he felt that he was quite fresh, and had
recovered his vigor, he thanked the Old Woman for her present, and set
off without even once looking back at the beautiful daughter. When he
was already some way off, he still heard in the distance the noisy cry
of the geese.

For three days, the Count had to wander in the wilderness before he
could find his way out. He then reached a large town. As no one knew
him, he was led into the royal palace, where the King and Queen were
sitting on their throne. The Count fell on one knee, drew the emerald
book out of his pocket, and laid it at the Queen’s feet. She bade him
rise and hand her the little book.

Hardly, however, had she opened it, and looked therein, than she fell
as if dead to the ground. The Count was seized by the King’s servants,
and was being led to prison, when the Queen opened her eyes, and
ordered them to release him, and every one was to go out, as she wished
to speak with him in private.

When the Queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said, “Of
what use to me are the splendors and honors with which I am surrounded!
Every morning I awake in pain and sorrow. I had three daughters, the
youngest of whom was so beautiful, that the whole world looked on her
as a wonder. She was as white as snow, as rosy as apple-blossoms, and
her hair as radiant as sunbeams. When she cried, not tears fell from
her eyes, but pearls and jewels only.

“When she was fifteen years old, the King summoned all three sisters
to come before his throne. You should have seen how all the people
gazed when the youngest entered. It was just as if the sun were rising!
Then the King spoke, ‘My Daughters, I know not when my last hour may
arrive. I will to-day decide what each shall receive at my death. You
all love me, but the one of you who loves me best, shall fare the best.’

“Each of them said she loved him best. ‘Can you not express to me,’
said the King, ‘how much you do love me, and thus I shall see what you
mean?’

“The eldest spoke. ‘I love my Father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.’
The second, ‘I love my Father as dearly as my prettiest dress.’ But the
youngest was silent.

“Then the father said, ‘And you, my dearest Child, how much do you love
me?’ ‘I do not know, and can compare my love with nothing.’ But her
father insisted that she should name something. So she said at last,
‘The best food does not please me without salt, therefore I love my
Father like salt.’

“When the King heard that, he fell into a passion and said, ‘If you
love me like salt, your love shall also be repaid with salt.’

“Then he divided the kingdom between the two elder, but caused a sack
of salt to be bound on the back of the youngest, and two servants had
to lead her forth into the wild forest.

“We all begged and prayed for her,” said the Queen, “but the King’s
anger was not to be appeased. How she cried when she had to leave us!
The whole road was strewn with the pearls which flowed from her eyes.

“The King soon afterward repented of his great severity, and had the
whole forest searched for the poor child, but no one could find her.
When I think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I know not how to
contain myself for sorrow. Many a time I console myself with the hope
that she is still alive, and may have hidden herself in a cave, or has
found shelter with compassionate people.

“But picture to yourself, when I opened your little emerald book, a
pearl lay therein, of exactly the same kind as those which used to fall
from my daughter’s eyes. And then you can also imagine how the sight of
it stirred my heart! You must tell me how you came by that pearl.”

The Count told her that he had received it from the Old Woman in the
forest, who had appeared very strange to him, and must be a Witch.
But he had neither seen nor heard anything of the Queen’s child. The
King and the Queen resolved to seek out the Old Woman. They thought
that there where the pearl had been, they would obtain news of their
daughter.


_The Gray Mask_

The Old Woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning-wheel,
spinning. It was already dusk, and a log which was burning on the
hearth gave a scanty light. All at once, there was a noise outside,
the geese were coming home from the pasture, and uttering their hoarse
cries. Soon afterward the daughter entered. But the Old Woman scarcely
thanked her, and only shook her head a little. The daughter sat down
beside her, took her spinning-wheel, and twisted the threads as nimbly
as a young girl. Thus they both sat for two hours, and exchanged never
a word.



At last, something rustled at the window, and two fiery eyes peered in.
It was an old night-owl, which cried, “_Uhu!_” three times.

The Old Woman looked up just a little, then she said, “Now, my little
Daughter, it is time for you to go out and do your work.”

She rose and went out, and where did she go? Over the meadows ever
onward into the valley. At last, she came to a well, with three old
oak-trees standing beside it. Meanwhile the moon had risen large and
round over the mountain, and it was so light that one could have found
a needle.

She removed a skin which covered her face, then bent down to the well,
and began to wash herself. When she had finished, she dipped the skin
also in the water, and laid it on the meadow, so that it should bleach
in the moonlight, and dry again.

But how the maiden was changed! Such a change as that was never seen
before! When the gray mask fell off, her golden hair broke forth like
sunbeams, and spread about like a mantle over her whole form. Her eyes
shone out as brightly as the stars in heaven, and her cheeks bloomed a
soft red like apple-blossoms.

But the fair maiden was sad. She sat down and wept bitterly. One tear
after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolled through her
long hair to the ground. There she sat, and would have remained sitting
a long time, if there had not been a rustling and cracking in the
boughs of the neighboring tree. She sprang up like a roe which has been
overtaken by the shot of the hunter.

Just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instant the
maiden had slipped on the old skin and vanished, as does a light blown
out by the wind.

She ran back home, trembling like an aspen-leaf. The Old Woman was
standing on the threshold, and the maiden was about to relate what had
befallen her, but the Old Woman laughed kindly, and said, “I already
know it.”

She led her into the room and lighted a new log. She did not, however,
sit down to her spinning again, but fetched a broom and began to sweep
and scour. “All must be clean and sweet,” she said to the maiden.

“But, Mother,” said the maiden, “why do you begin work at so late an
hour? What do you expect?”

“Do you know then what time it is?” asked the Old Woman.

“Not yet midnight,” answered the maiden, “but already past eleven
o’clock.”

“Do you not remember,” continued the Old Woman, “that it is three years
to-day since you came to me? Your time is up, we can no longer remain
together.”

The maiden was terrified, and said, “Alas! dear Mother, will you cast
me off? Where shall I go? I have no friends, and no home to which I
can go. I have always done as you bade me, and you have always been
satisfied with me. Do not send me away.”

The Old Woman would not tell the maiden what lay before her. “My stay
here is over,” she said to her, “but when I depart, house and parlor
must be clean: therefore do not hinder me in my work. Have no care for
yourself. You shall find a roof to shelter you, and the wages which I
will give you shall also content you.”

“But tell me what is about to happen,” the maiden continued to entreat.

“I tell you again, do not hinder me in my work. Do not say a word
more, go to your chamber, take the skin off your face, and put on the
silken gown which you had on when you came to me, and then wait in your
chamber until I call you.”


_The Goose-Girl_

But I must once more tell of the King and Queen, who had journeyed
forth with the Count in order to seek out the Old Woman in the
wilderness. The Count had strayed away from them in the wood by night,
and had to walk onward alone.

Next day, it seemed to him that he was on the right track. He still
went forward, until darkness came on, then he climbed a tree, intending
to pass the night there, for he feared that he might lose his way. When
the moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived a figure coming
down the mountain. She had no stick in her hand, yet he could see that
it was the goose-girl, whom he had seen before in the house of the Old
Woman.

“Oho,” cried he, “there she comes, and if I once get hold of one of the
Witches, the other shall not escape me!”

But how astonished he was, when she went to the well, took off the
skin and washed herself. Her golden hair fell down all about her,
and she was more beautiful than any one whom he had ever seen in the
whole world. He hardly dared to breathe, but stretched his head as far
forward through the leaves as he dared, and stared at her. Either he
bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, the bough suddenly
cracked, and that very moment the maiden slipped into the skin, sprang
away like a roe, and as the moon was suddenly covered, disappeared from
his eyes.

Hardly had she disappeared, before the Count descended from the tree,
and hastened after her with nimble steps. He had not gone far before he
saw, in the twilight, two figures coming over the meadow. It was the
King and Queen, who had perceived from a distance the light shining in
the Old Woman’s little house, and were going to it.

The Count told them what wonderful thing he had seen by the well, and
they did not doubt but that she was their lost daughter. They walked
onward full of joy, and soon came to the little house. The geese were
sitting all round it, and had thrust their heads under their wings and
were sleeping, and not one of them moved.

The King and Queen looked in at the window. The Old Woman was sitting
there quietly spinning, nodding her head and never looking round. The
room was perfectly clean, as if the little Mist Men, who carry no dust
on their feet, lived there. Their daughter, however, they did not see.
They gazed at all this for a long time. At last they took heart, and
knocked softly at the window.

The Old Woman appeared to have been expecting them. She rose, and
called out quite kindly, “Come in,--I know you already.”

When they had entered the room, the Old Woman said, “You might have
spared yourself the long walk, if you had not three years ago unjustly
driven away your child, who is so good and lovable. No harm has come
to her. For three years she has had to tend the geese. With them
she has learnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart. You,
however, have been sufficiently punished by the misery in which you
have lived.”

Then she went to the chamber and called, “Come out, my little Daughter.”

Thereupon the door opened, and the Princess stepped out in her silken
garments, with her golden hair and her shining eyes, and it was as if
an Angel from Heaven had entered.

She went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks and kissed
them. There was no help for it, they all had to weep for joy. The young
Count stood near them; and when she perceived him, she became as red in
the face as a moss-rose, she herself did not know why.

The King said, “My dear Child, I have given away my kingdom, what shall
I give thee?”

“She needs nothing,” said the Old Woman. “I give her the tears that she
has wept on your account. They are precious pearls, finer than those
that are found in the sea, and worth more than your whole kingdom, and
I give her my little house as payment for her services.”

When the Old Woman had said that, she disappeared from their sight. The
walls rattled a little, and when the King and Queen looked round, the
little house had changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had been
spread, and the servants were running hither and thither.




  

THE SHOES THAT WERE DANCED TO PIECES


There was once upon a time, a King who had twelve daughters, each one
more beautiful than the other. They all slept together in one chamber,
in which their beds stood side by side.

Every night, when they were in them, the King locked the door, and
bolted it. But in the morning, when he unlocked the door, he saw that
their shoes were worn out with dancing, and no one could find out how
that had happened.

Then the King caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever could discover
where they danced at night, should choose one of them for his wife and
be King after his death. But that whosoever came forward and had not
discovered it within three days and nights, should forfeit his life.

It was not long before a King’s Son presented himself, and offered to
undertake the enterprise. He was well received, and in the evening was
led into a room adjoining the Princesses’ sleeping-chamber. His bed
was placed there, and he was to watch where they went and danced. And
in order that they might do nothing secretly or go away to some other
place, the door of their room was left open.

But the eyelids of the Prince grew heavy as lead, and he fell asleep.

When he awoke in the morning, all twelve had been to the dance, for
their shoes were standing there with holes in the soles.

On the second and third nights it fell out just the same, and then his
head was struck off without mercy. Many others came after this and
undertook the enterprise, but all forfeited their lives.

Now, it came to pass that a poor soldier, who had a wound, and could
serve no longer, found himself on the road to the town where the King
lived. There he met an Old Woman, who asked him where he was going.

“I hardly know myself,” answered he, and added in jest, “I had half a
mind to discover where the Princesses danced their shoes into holes,
and thus become King.”

“That is not so difficult,” said the Old Woman, “you must not drink the
wine which will be brought to you at night.”

With that she gave him a little cloak, and said, “If you put on that,
you will be invisible, and then you can steal after the twelve.”

When the soldier had received this good advice, he took heart, went to
the King, and announced himself as a suitor. He was as well received as
the others, and royal garments were put upon him.

He was conducted that evening, at bedtime, into the outer-chamber, and
as he was about to go to bed, the eldest came and brought him a cup of
wine.

He lay down, but did not drink the wine.

The Twelve Princesses, in their chamber, laughed, and the eldest said,
“He, too, might as well have saved his life.”

With that they got up, opened wardrobes, presses, cupboards, and
brought out pretty dresses; dressed themselves before the mirrors,
sprang about, and rejoiced at the prospect of the dance.

Only the youngest said, “I know not how it is. You are very happy, but
I feel strange. Some misfortune is certainly about to befall us.”

“You are a goose, who are always frightened,” said the eldest. “Have
you forgotten how many King’s Sons have already come here in vain? I
had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping-draught. In any
case, the clown would not have awakened.”

When they were all ready, the eldest then went to her bed and tapped it.

It immediately sank into the earth; and one after the other they
descended through the opening, the eldest going first.

The soldier, who had watched everything, tarried no longer, put on his
little cloak, and went down last with the youngest. Half-way down the
steps, he just trod a little on her dress.

She was terrified at that, and cried out, “What is that? who is pulling
at my dress?”

“Don’t be so silly!” said the eldest, “you have caught it on a nail.”

Then they went all the way down, and when they were at the bottom, they
were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees, all the leaves
of which were of silver, and shone and glistened. The soldier thought,
“I must carry a token away with me,” and broke off a twig from one of
them, on which the tree cracked with a loud report.

The youngest cried out again, “Something is wrong, did you hear the
crack?”

But the eldest said, “It is a gun fired for joy, because we have got
rid of our Prince so quickly.”

After that they came into an avenue where all the leaves were of gold,
and lastly into a third where they were of bright diamonds. He broke
off a twig from each, which made such a crack each time that the
youngest started back in terror, but the eldest still declared that
they were salutes.

They went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve little
boats, and in every boat sat a handsome Prince, all of whom were
waiting for the Twelve Princesses. Each took one of them with him, but
the soldier seated himself by the youngest.

Then her Prince said, “I can’t tell why the boat is so much heavier
to-day. I shall have to row with all my strength, if I am to get it
across.”

“What should cause that,” said the youngest, “but the warm weather? I
feel very warm too.”

On the opposite side of the lake stood a splendid, brightly-lit castle,
from whence resounded the joyous music of trumpets and kettle-drums.
They rowed thither, entered, and each Prince danced with the maiden he
loved, but the soldier danced with them unseen. And when one of them
had a cup of wine in her hand he drank it up, so that the cup was empty
when she carried it to her mouth. The youngest was alarmed at this, but
the eldest always made her be silent.

They danced there till three o’clock in the morning, when all the shoes
were danced into holes, and they were forced to leave off. The Princes
rowed them back again over the lake, and this time the soldier seated
himself by the eldest. On the shore they took leave of their Princes,
and promised to return the following night.

When they reached the stairs, the soldier ran on in front and lay down
in his bed, and when the Twelve Princesses had come up slowly and
wearily, he was already snoring so loudly that they could all hear him,
and they said, “So far as he is concerned, we are safe.”

They took off their beautiful dresses, laid them away, put the worn-out
shoes under the bed, and lay down. Next morning, the soldier was
resolved not to speak, but to watch the wonderful goings on, and that
night again went with them. Then everything was done just as it had
been done the first time, and they danced until their shoes were worn
to pieces. But the third time, he took a cup away with him as a token.

When the hour had arrived for him to give his answer, he took the three
twigs and the cup, and went to the King, but the Twelve Princesses
stood behind the door, and listened for what he was going to say.

When the King put the question, “Where have my Twelve Daughters danced
their shoes to pieces in the night?” he answered, “In an underground
castle with Twelve Princes,” and related how it had come to pass, and
brought out the tokens.

The King then summoned his daughters, and asked them if the soldier had
told the truth, and when they saw that they were betrayed, and that
falsehood would be of no avail, they were obliged to confess all.

Thereupon the King asked which of them he would have for his wife?

He answered, “I am no longer young, so give me the eldest.”

Then the wedding was celebrated on the self-same day, and the kingdom
was promised him after the King’s death. But the Princes were bewitched
for as many days more as they had danced nights with the Twelve.




  

THE NIX OF THE MILL-POND


There was once upon a time, a miller who lived with his wife in great
contentment. They had money and land, and their prosperity increased
year by year more and more. But ill-luck comes like a thief in the
night, as their wealth had increased so did it again decrease, year by
year.

At last the miller could hardly call the mill in which he lived his
own. He was in great distress, and when he lay down after his day’s
work, found no rest, but full of care, tossed about in his bed.

One morning, he rose before daybreak and went out into the open air,
thinking that perhaps there his heart might become lighter. As he
was stepping over the mill-dam, the first sunbeam was just breaking
forth, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond. He turned round and
perceived a beautiful woman, rising slowly out of the water. Her long
hair, which she was holding off her shoulders with her soft hands, fell
down on both sides, and covered her white body.

He saw that she was the Nix of the Mill-pond, and in his fright did not
know whether he should run away or stay where he was.

But the Nix made her sweet voice heard, called him by his name, and
asked him why he was so sad? The miller was at first struck dumb, but
when he heard her speak so kindly, he took heart, and told her how he
had formerly lived in wealth and happiness, but that now he was so poor
that he did not know what to do.

“Be easy,” answered the Nix, “I will make you richer and happier than
you have ever been before, only you must promise to give me the young
thing which has just been born in your house.”

“What else can that be,” thought the miller, “but a young puppy or
kitten?” and he promised her what she desired.

The Nix descended into the water again, and he hurried back to his
mill, consoled and in good spirits. He had not yet reached it, when the
maid-servant came out of the house, and cried to him to rejoice, for
his wife had a little boy. The miller stood as if struck by lightning.
He saw very well that the cunning Nix had been aware of it, and had
cheated him.

Hanging his head, he went up to his wife’s bedside and when she said,
“Why do you not rejoice over the fine boy?” he told her what had
befallen him, and what kind of a promise he had given to the Nix. “Of
what use to me are riches and prosperity?” he added, “if I am to lose
my child; but what can I do?”

Even the relations, who had come thither to wish them joy, did not
know what to say. In the meantime prosperity again returned to the
miller’s house. All that he undertook succeeded; it was as if presses
and coffers filled themselves of their own accord, and as if money
multiplied nightly in the cupboards. It was not long before his wealth
was greater than it had ever been before. But he could not rejoice over
it untroubled, the bargain which he had made with the Nix tormented his
soul.

Whenever he passed the mill-pond, he feared she might ascend and remind
him of his debt. He never let the boy himself go near the water.
“Beware,” he said to him, “if you do but touch the water, a hand will
rise, seize you, and draw you down.”

But as year after year went by, and the Nix did not show herself again,
the miller began to feel at ease. The boy grew up to be a youth and
was apprenticed to a huntsman. When he had learnt everything, and had
become an excellent huntsman, the lord of the village took him into his
service. In the village lived a beautiful and true-hearted maiden, who
pleased the huntsman. When his master perceived that, he gave him a
little house, the two were married, lived peacefully and happily, and
loved each other with all their hearts.

One day, the huntsman was chasing a roe. And when the animal turned
aside from the forest into the open country, he pursued it and at last
shot it. He did not notice that he was now in the neighborhood of the
dangerous mill-pond, and went, after he had disembowelled the stag, to
the water, in order to wash his blood-stained hands.

Scarcely, however, had he dipped them in than the Nix ascended,
smilingly wound her dripping arms around him, and drew him quickly down
under the waves, which closed over him.

When it was evening, and the huntsman did not return home, his wife
grew alarmed. She went out to seek him, and as he had often told her
that he had to be on his guard against the snares of the Nix, and
dared not venture into the neighborhood of the mill-pond, she already
suspected what had happened. She hastened to the water, and when she
found his hunting-pouch lying on the shore, she could no longer have
any doubt of the misfortune.

Lamenting her sorrow, and wringing her hands, she called on her beloved
by name, but in vain. She hurried across to the other side of the
pond, and called him anew. She reviled the Nix with harsh words, but
no answer followed. The surface of the water remained calm, only the
crescent moon stared steadily back at her. The poor woman did not leave
the pond. With hasty steps, she paced round and round it, without
resting a moment, sometimes in silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry,
sometimes softly sobbing. At last her strength came to an end, she sank
down to the ground and fell into a heavy sleep.

Presently a dream took possession of her. She was anxiously climbing
upward between great masses of rock. Thorns and briars caught her feet,
the rain beat in her face, and the wind tossed her long hair about.
When she had reached the summit, quite a different sight presented
itself to her. The sky was blue, the air soft, the ground sloped gently
downward, and on a green meadow, gay with flowers of every color, stood
a pretty cottage. She went up to it and opened the door. There sat an
Old Woman with white hair, who beckoned to her kindly.

At that very moment, the poor woman awoke, day had already dawned,
and she at once resolved to act in accordance with her dream. She
laboriously climbed the mountain. Everything was exactly as she
had seen it in the night. The Old Woman received her kindly, and
pointed out a chair on which she might sit. “You must have met with a
misfortune,” she said, “since you have sought out my lonely cottage.”

With tears, the woman related what had befallen her.

“Be comforted,” said the Old Woman, “I will help you. Here is a Golden
Comb for you. Tarry till the full moon has risen, then go to the
mill-pond, seat yourself on the shore, and comb your long black hair
with this comb. When you have done, lay it down on the bank, and you
will see what will happen.”

The woman returned home, but the time till the full moon came, passed
slowly. At last the shining disc appeared in the heavens, then she went
out to the mill-pond, sat down and combed her long black hair with the
Golden Comb. When she had finished, she laid it down at the water’s
edge.

It was not long before there was a movement in the depths, a wave rose,
rolled to the shore, and bore the comb away with it.

In not more than the time necessary for the comb to sink to the bottom,
the surface of the water parted, and the head of the huntsman arose.
He did not speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful glances. At
the same instant, a second wave came rushing up, and covered the man’s
head. All had vanished, the mill-pond lay peaceful as before, and
nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it.



Full of sorrow, the woman went back, but again the dream showed
her the cottage of the Old Woman. Next morning, she again set out and
complained of her woes to the Wise Woman.

The Old Woman gave her a Golden Flute, and said, “Tarry till the full
moon comes again, then take this flute. Play a beautiful air on it, and
when you have finished, lay it on the sand. Then you will see what will
happen.”

The wife did as the old woman told her. No sooner was the flute lying
on the sand, than there was a stirring in the depths, and a wave rushed
up and bore the flute away with it.

Immediately afterward the water parted, and not only the head of
the man, but half of his body also arose. He stretched out his arms
longingly toward her. But a second wave came up, covered him, and drew
him down again.

“Alas, what does it profit me?” said the unhappy woman, “that I should
see my beloved, only to lose him again?”

Despair filled her heart anew, but the dream led her a third time
to the house of the Old Woman. She sat out, and the Wise Woman gave
her a Golden Spinning-Wheel, consoled her and said, “All is not yet
fulfilled, tarry until the time of the full moon. Then take the
spinning-wheel, seat yourself on the shore, and spin the spool full.
When you have done that, place the spinning-wheel near the water, and
you will see what will happen.”

The woman obeyed all she said exactly. As soon as the full moon showed
itself, she carried the Golden Spinning-Wheel to the shore, and spun
industriously until the flax came to an end, and the spool was quite
filled with the threads. No sooner was the wheel standing on the shore
than there was a more violent movement than before in the depths of
the pond, and a mighty wave rushed up, and bore the wheel away with it.

Immediately the head and the whole body of the man rose into the air,
in a water-spout. He quickly sprang to the shore, caught his wife by
the hand and fled.

But they had scarcely gone a very little distance, when the whole pond
rose with a frightful roar, and streamed out over the open country. The
fugitives already saw death before their eyes, when the woman in her
terror implored the help of the Old Woman, and in an instant they were
transformed, she into a Toad, he into a Frog.

The flood which had overtaken them could not destroy them, but it tore
them apart and carried them far away.

When the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again, they
regained their human form, but neither knew where the other was. They
found themselves among strange people, who did not know their native
land. High mountains and deep valleys lay between them. In order to
keep themselves alive, they were both obliged to tend sheep.

For many long years, they drove their flocks through field and forest
and were full of sorrow and longing. When spring had once more broken
forth on the earth, one day they both went out with their flocks, and
as chance would have it, they drew near each other. They met in a
valley, but did not recognize each other. Yet they rejoiced that they
were no longer so lonely. Henceforth they every day drove their flocks
to the same place. They did not speak much, but they felt comforted.

One evening when the full moon was shining in the sky, and the sheep
were already at rest, the shepherd pulled the flute out of his pocket,
and played on it a beautiful but sorrowful air. When he had finished,
he saw that the shepherdess was weeping bitterly.

“Why are you weeping?” he asked.

“Alas,” answered she, “thus shone the full moon when I played this air
on the flute for the last time, and the head of my beloved rose out of
the water.”

He looked at her, and it seemed as if a veil fell from his eyes, and
he recognized his dear wife. And when she looked at him, and the moon
shone in his face she knew him also. They embraced and kissed each
other, and no one need ask if they were happy.




  

THE LITTLE HOUSE IN THE WOOD


A poor woodcutter lived with his wife and three daughters in a little
hut on the edge of a lonely wood. One morning as he was about to go to
his work, he said to his wife, “Let my dinner be brought into the wood
to me by my eldest daughter, or I shall never get my work done. And in
order that she may not miss her way,” he added, “I will take a bag of
millet with me and strew the seeds on the path.”

When, therefore, the sun was just above the centre of the wood, the
girl set out on her way with a bowl of soup. But the field-sparrows,
and wood-sparrows, larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked
up the millet long before, and the girl could not find the track. Then
trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank and night
began to fall. The trees rustled in the darkness, the owls hooted, and
she began to be afraid.

Then in the distance she perceived a light which glimmered between the
trees. “There ought to be some people living there, who can take me in
for the night,” thought she, and went up to the light. It was not long
before she came to a house the windows of which were all lighted up.

She knocked, and a rough voice from the inside cried, “Come in.”

The girl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked at the door of the
room. “Just come in,” cried the voice.

And when she opened the door, an old gray-haired man was sitting at the
table, supporting his face with both hands, and his white beard fell
down over the table almost as far as the ground. By the stove lay three
animals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow.

The girl told her story to the Old Man, and begged for shelter for the
night. The man said:

    “_Pretty little Hen,
      Pretty little Cock,
      And pretty brindled Cow,
      What say ye all now?_”

“_Duks,_” answered the animals, and that must have meant, “We are
willing,” for the Old Man said, “Here you shall have shelter and food.
Go to the fire, and cook us our supper.”

The girl found in the kitchen abundance of everything and cooked a good
supper, but had no thought of the animals. She carried the full dishes
to the table, seated herself by the gray-haired man, ate and satisfied
her hunger.

When she had had enough, she said, “But now I am tired. Where is there
a bed in which I can lie down, and sleep?” The animals replied:

    “_Thou hast eaten with him,
      Thou hast drunk with him,
      Thou hast had no thought for us,
      So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night._”

Then said the Old Man, “Just go up-stairs, and you will find a room
with two beds. Shake them up, and put white linen on them, and then I,
too, will come and lie down to sleep.”

The girl went up, and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheets
on, she lay down in one of them without waiting any longer for the Old
Man.

After some time, however, the gray-haired man came, took his candle,
looked at the girl and shook his head. When he saw that she had fallen
into a sound sleep, he opened a trap-door, and let her down into the
cellar.

Late at night, the woodcutter came home, and reproached his wife for
leaving him to hunger all day. “It is not my fault,” she replied, “the
girl went out with your dinner, and must have lost herself, but she is
sure to come back to-morrow.”

The woodcutter, however, arose before dawn to go into the wood, and
requested that the second daughter should take him his dinner that day.
“I will take a bag with lentils,” said he; “the seeds are larger than
millet. The girl will see them better, and can’t lose her way.”

At dinner-time, therefore, the girl took out the food, but the lentils
had disappeared. The birds of the wood had picked them up as they had
done the day before, and had left none.

The girl wandered about in the wood until night, and then she too
reached the house of the Old Man, was told to go in, and begged for
food and a bed. The man with the white beard again asked the animals:

     “_Pretty little Hen,_
      _Pretty little Cock,_
      _And pretty brindled Cow,_
      _What say ye all now?_”

The animals again replied “_Duks_.” And everything happened just as it
had happened the day before. The girl cooked a good meal, ate and drank
with the Old Man, and did not concern herself about the animals, and
when she inquired about her bed, they answered:

     “_Thou hast eaten with him,_
      _Thou hast drunk with him,_
      _Thou hast had, no thought for us,_
      _So find out for thyself where thou canst pass the night._”

When she was asleep the Old Man came, looked at her, shook his head,
and let her down into the cellar.

On the third morning, the woodcutter said to his wife, “Send our
youngest child out with my dinner to-day, she has always been good and
obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not run about after
every wild bumblebee, as her sisters did.”

The mother did not want to do it, and said, “Am I to lose my dearest
child, as well?”

“Have no fear,” he replied, “the girl will not go astray; she is too
prudent and sensible. Besides, I will take some peas with me, and strew
them about. They are still larger than lentils, and will show her the
way.”

But when the girl went out with her basket on her arm, the wood-pigeons
had already got all the peas in their crops, and she did not know which
way to turn. She was full of sorrow and never ceased to think how
hungry her father would be, and how her good mother would grieve, if
she did not return home.

At length, when it grew dark, she saw the light and came to the house
in the wood. She begged quite prettily to be allowed to spend the night
there. And the man with the white beard once more asked his animals:

    “_Pretty little Hen,
      Pretty little Cock,
      And pretty brindled Cow,
      What say ye all now?_”

“_Duks_,” said they. Then the girl went to the stove where the animals
were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and stroked their smooth
feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindled cow between her horns.

And when, in obedience to the Old Man’s orders, she had made ready some
good soup, and the bowl was placed upon the table, she said, “Am I to
eat as much as I want, and the good animals to have nothing? Outside is
food in plenty, I will look after them first.”

So she went and brought some barley and strewed it for the cock and
hen, and a whole armful of sweet-smelling hay for the cow. “I hope you
will like it, dear Animals,” said she, “and you shall have a refreshing
draught in case you are thirsty.”

Then she fetched in a bucketful of water, and the cock and hen jumped
on to the edge of it and dipped their beaks in. Then held up their
heads as the birds do when they drink, and the brindled cow also took a
hearty draught.

When the animals were fed, the girl seated herself at the table by the
Old Man, and ate what he had left. It was not long before the cock and
the hen began to thrust their heads beneath their wings, and the eyes
of the cow likewise began to blink. Then said the girl, “Ought we not
to go to bed?”

    “_Pretty little Hen,
      Pretty little Cock,
      And pretty brindled Cow,
      What say ye all now?_”

The animals answered “_Duks_.”

    “_Thou hast eaten with us,
      Thou hast drunk with us,
      Thou hast had kind thought for all of us,
      We wish thee good-night._”

Then the girl went up-stairs, shook the feather-beds, and laid clean
sheets on them. And when she had done it the Old Man came and lay down
on one of the beds, and his white beard reached down to his feet. The
girl lay down on the other, said her prayers, and fell asleep.

She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noise in the
house that she awoke. There was a sound of cracking and splitting in
every corner. The doors sprang open, and beat against the walls. The
beams groaned as if they were being torn out of their joints. It seemed
as if the staircase were falling down. And at length there was a crash
as if the entire roof had fallen in.

As, however, all grew quiet once more, and the girl was not hurt, she
stayed quietly lying where she was, and fell asleep again. But when she
woke up in the morning with the brilliancy of the sunshine, what did
her eyes behold?

She was lying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with
royal splendor. On the walls, golden flowers grew up on a ground of
green silk. The bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet, and on
a chair close by, was a pair of shoes embroidered with pearls.

The girl believed that she was in a dream, but three richly clad
attendants came in, and asked what orders she would like to give?

“If you will go,” she replied, “I will get up at once and make ready
some soup for the Old Man, and then I will feed the pretty little hen,
and the cock, and the beautiful brindled cow.”

She thought the Old Man was up already, and looked round at his bed.
He, however, was not lying in it, but a stranger.

And while she was looking at him, and becoming aware that he was young
and handsome, he awoke, sat up in bed, and said, “I am a King’s Son,
and was enchanted by a wicked Witch, and made to live in this wood, as
an old gray-haired man. No one was allowed to be with me but my three
attendants in the form of a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow. The spell
was not to be broken until a girl came to us, whose heart was so good
that she showed herself full of love, not only toward mankind, but
toward animals--and that you have done, and by you, at midnight, we
were set free, and the old house in the wood was changed back again
into my royal palace.”

And when they had arisen, the King’s Son ordered the three attendants
to set out and fetch the father and mother of the girl to the marriage
feast.

“But where are my two sisters?” inquired the girl.

“I have locked them in the cellar, and to-morrow they shall be led into
the wood, and shall live as servants to a charcoal-burner, until they
have grown kinder, and do not leave poor animals to suffer hunger.”




  

MAID MALEEN


There was once a King who had a son who asked in marriage the daughter
of a mighty King. She was called Maid Maleen, and was very beautiful.
As her father wished to give her to another, the Prince was rejected.

But since they both loved each other with all their hearts, they would
not give each other up, and Maid Maleen said to her father, “I can and
will take no other for my husband.”

Then the King flew into a passion, and ordered a dark tower to be
built, into which no ray of sunlight or moonlight should enter. When
it was finished, he said, “Therein shall you be imprisoned for seven
years, and then I will come and see if your perverse spirit is broken.”

Meat and drink for the seven years were carried into the tower; and
then she and her waiting-woman were led into it and walled up, and
thus cut off from the sky and from the earth. There they sat in the
darkness, and knew not when day or night began. The King’s Son often
went round and round the tower, and called their names, but no sound
from without pierced through the thick walls. What else could they do
but lament and complain?

Meanwhile, the time passed, and by the small amount of food and drink
left they knew that the seven years were coming to an end. They thought
the moment of their deliverance was come. But no stroke of the hammer
was heard, no stone fell out of the wall, and it seemed to Maid Maleen
that her father had forgotten her. As they had food for only a short
time longer, and saw a miserable death awaiting them, Maid Maleen said,
“We must try our last chance, and see if we can break through the wall.”

She took the bread-knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a
stone, and when she was tired, the waiting-maid took her turn. With
great labor they succeeded in getting out one stone, then a second, and
third. And when three days were over, the first ray of light fell on
their darkness, and at last the opening was so large that they could
look out.

The sky was blue, and a fresh breeze played on their faces; but how
melancholy everything looked all around! Her father’s castle lay
in ruins, the town and the villages were, so far as could be seen,
destroyed by fire, the fields far and wide laid to waste, and no human
being was visible.

When the opening in the wall was large enough for them to slip through,
the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then Maid Maleen followed. But
where were they to go? The enemy had ravaged the whole kingdom, driven
away the King, and slain all the inhabitants. They wandered forth to
seek another country, but nowhere did they find a shelter, or a human
being to give them a mouthful of bread. Their need was so great that
they were forced to appease their hunger with nettle-plants.

When, after long journeying, they came into another country, they tried
to get work everywhere. But wherever they knocked they were turned
away, and no one would have pity on them.

At last they arrived in a large city and went to the royal palace.
There also they were ordered to go away, but at last the cook said that
they might stay in the kitchen and be scullions.

The King’s Son in whose kingdom they were, was, however, the very man
who had been betrothed to Maid Maleen. His father had chosen another
Bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her heart was wicked. The
wedding was fixed, and the girl had already arrived. Because of her
great ugliness, however, she shut herself in her room, and allowed no
one to see her, and Maid Maleen had to take her her meals from the
kitchen.

When the day came for the Bride and the Bridegroom to go to church,
she was ashamed of her ugliness, and afraid that if she showed herself
in the streets, she would be mocked and laughed at by the people. Then
said she to Maid Maleen, “A great piece of luck has befallen you. I
have sprained my foot, and cannot walk through the streets. You shall
put on my wedding-clothes and take my place. A greater honor than that
you cannot have!”

Maid Maleen, however, refused it, and said, “I wish for no honor which
is not suitable for me.”



It was in vain, too, that the Bride offered her gold. At last she
said angrily, “If you do not obey me, it shall cost you your life. I
have but to speak the word, and your head will lie at your feet.”

Then she was forced to obey, and put on the Bride’s magnificent clothes
and all her jewels. When she entered the royal hall, every one was
amazed at her great beauty, and the King said to his son, “This is the
Bride whom I have chosen for you, and whom you must lead to church.”

The Bridegroom was astonished, and thought, “She is like my Maid
Maleen, and I should believe that it was she herself, but she has long
been shut up in the tower or dead.”

He took her by the hand and led her to church. On the way was a
nettle-plant, and she said:

    “_Nettle-plant, Nettle-plant,
      Nettle-plant so small!
      What are you doing here,
      Alone by the wall?
      I have the time known,
      When unroasted, unboiled,
      I ate thee alone!_”

“What are you saying?” asked the King’s Son.

“Nothing,” she replied, “I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.”

He was surprised that she knew about her, but kept silence. When they
came to the foot-plank into the churchyard, she said:

    “_Foot-bridge, break not,
      I am not the true Bride._”

“What are you saying there?” asked the King’s Son.

“Nothing,” she replied, “I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.”

When they came to the church-door, she said once more:

    “_Church-door, break not,
      I am not the true Bride._”

“What are you saying there?” asked he.

“Ah,” she answered, “I was only thinking of Maid Maleen.”

Then he took out a precious chain, put it round her neck, and fastened
the clasp. Thereupon they entered the church, and the priest joined
their hands together before the altar, and married them. He led her
home but she did not speak a single word the whole way.

When they got back to the royal palace, she hurried into the Bride’s
chamber, put off the magnificent clothes and the jewels, dressed
herself in her gray gown, and kept nothing but the jewel on her neck,
which she had received from the Bridegroom.

When the night came, and the Bride was to be led into the apartment of
the King’s Son, she let her veil fall over her face, that he might not
observe the deception.

As soon as every one had gone away, he said to her, “What did you say
to the nettle-plant which was growing by the wayside?”

“To which nettle-plant?” asked she; “I don’t talk to nettle-plants.”

“If you did not do it, then you are not the true Bride,” said he.

So she bethought herself, and said:

    “_I must go my maid to see,
      Who keeps my secret thoughts for me._”

She went out and sought Maid Maleen. “Girl, what have you been saying
to the nettle?”

“I said nothing but:

    “_Nettle-plant, Nettle-plant,
      Nettle-plant so small!
      What are you doing here,
      Alone by the wall?
      I have the time known,
      When unroasted, unboiled,
      I ate thee alone!_”

The Bride ran back into the chamber, and said, “I know now what I said
to the nettle,” and she repeated the words which she had just heard.

“But what did you say to the foot-bridge when we went over it?” asked
the King’s Son.

“To the foot-bridge?” she answered. “I don’t talk to foot-bridges.”

“Then you are not the true Bride.”

She again said:

    “_I must go my maid to see,
      Who keeps my secret thoughts for me,_”

and ran out and found Maid Maleen. “Girl, what did you say to the
foot-bridge?”

“I said nothing but:

    “_Foot-bridge, break not,
      I am not the true Bride._”

“That costs you your life!” cried the Bride, but she hurried into the
room, and said, “I know now what I said to the foot-bridge,” and she
repeated the words.

“But what did you say to the church-door?”

“To the church-door?” she replied; “I don’t talk to church-doors.”

“Then you are not the true Bride.”

She went out and found Maid Maleen, and said, “Girl, what did you say
to the church-door?”

“I said nothing but:

    “_Church-door, break not,
      I am not the true Bride._”

“That will break your neck for you!” cried the Bride, and flew into a
terrible passion, but she hastened back into the room, and said, “I
know now what I said to the church-door,” and she repeated the words.

“But where have you the jewel which I gave you at the church-door?”

“What jewel?” she answered; “you did not give me any jewel.”

“I myself put it round your neck, and I myself fastened it. If you do
not know that, you are not the true Bride.”

He drew the veil from her face, and when he saw her ugliness, he sprang
back terrified, and said, “How come you here? Who are you?”

“I am your betrothed Bride, but because I feared lest the people should
mock me when they saw me out of doors, I commanded the scullery-maid to
dress herself in my clothes, and to go to church instead of me.”

“Where is the girl?” said he; “I want to see her, go and bring her
here.”

She went out and told the servants that the scullery-maid was an
impostor, and that they must take her out into the courtyard and strike
off her head.

The servants laid hold of Maid Maleen and wanted to drag her out, but
she screamed so loudly for help, that the King’s Son heard her voice,
hurried out of his chamber and ordered them to set the maiden free.

Lights were brought, and then he saw on her neck the gold chain which
he had given her at the church-door.

“You are the true Bride,” said he, “who went with me to church. Come
with me now to my room.”

When they were both alone, he said, “On the way to the church you did
name Maid Maleen, who was my betrothed Bride. If I could believe it
possible, I should think she was standing before me--you are like her
in every respect.”

She answered, “I am Maid Maleen, who for your sake was imprisoned seven
years in the darkness, who suffered hunger and thirst, and has lived
so long in want and poverty. To-day, however, the sun is shining on me
once more. I was married to you in the church, and I am your lawful
wife.”

Then they kissed each other, and were happy all the days of their lives.

The false Bride was rewarded for what she had done by having her head
cut off.

The tower in which Maid Maleen had been imprisoned remained standing
for a long time, and when the children passed by it, they sang:

    “_Kling, klang, gloria.
      Who sits within this tower?
      A King’s Daughter, she sits within,
      A sight of her I cannot win,
      The wall it will not break,
      The stone cannot be pierced.
      Little Hans, with your coat so gay,
      Follow me, follow me, fast as you may._”
